DOI:10.1145/3750037
social connections one has.6 Both are
Relationships with “digital humans” might on the rise as a result of a complex of
interrelated factors, including aging
help people feel less lonely. But will this
populations, changes in the family
technology increase social isolation?
structure associated with lower birth
rates and increased economic op-
BY ROBERT SPARROW AND JAMES BROWN portunities for women, increased la-
bor force mobility, changes in urban
density, an increase in the number of
Against
people living with chronic conditions
that restrict mobility, rising rates of
anxiety and depression, and policy re-
Imaginary sponses to pandemics.8
Given that the increase in loneli-
ness and social isolation over the past
several decades appears to be driven
Friends:
by economic and demographic dy-
namics that are difficult to reverse,
there is substantial interest, from
Why Digital both governments and researchers,
in technological solutions to both
problems.20,21,25 For several decades
now, engineers have been working
Companions Are
to develop social robots for eldercare
settings, in the hope that this might
help combat the loneliness and social
No Solution to isolation that are endemic in such set-
tings. This project has been criticized
as disrespectful—even harmful—to
older persons.4,36,38 It has also, to date,
Social Isolation
failed because social robots remain
expensive, have limited capacities,
and are unable to sustain extended
engagements with most users.14,16,41
However, a new technology, “digital
companions,” looks more plausible
LONELINESS AND SOCIAL isolation constitute
major threats to public health.15 Homo sapiens is
a gregarious species and the nature and extent of
individuals’ relationships with other human beings
have a significant influence on their psychological
and physiological health.7 Lack of contact with
other people increases both mortality and
morbidity.2,25 Social isolation refers to an objective lack
of social connections, while loneliness is subjective
dissatisfaction with the number and quality of
60 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | FEBRUARY 2026 | VOL. 69 | NO. 2
SEGAMI
YTTEG/SEGAMI
RENHOJ
YB
OTOHP
GNISU
,REHTWORC
RETEP
YB
NOITARTSULLI
research and advances
key insights
˽ A new technology, “digital humans,”
offers a realistic possibility of reducing
loneliness among socially isolated older
persons, where social robots have failed.
˽ Encouraging people to mistake digital
companions for real friends is prima facie
unethical. Encouraging people to have
imaginary friends is no solution to social
isolation.
˽ There is a risk that the development of
digital companions will work to increase
social isolation.
˽ Proposals to use digital companions to
combat loneliness and social isolation
underestimate the importance of touch,
physical companionship, and mutual aid
for human well-being.
FEBRUARY 2026 | VOL. 69 | NO. 2 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 61
research and advances
as a potential solution to loneliness nologies—especially computers, mo-
and social isolation from a techno- bile phones, and social media—play
logical perspective, with the prospect a role in generating loneliness and
of realistic-looking computer-gener- social isolation.43 Nevertheless, new
ated characters capable of convincing Providing a digital technologies are regularly touted as
natural language conversation just having the potential to reduce loneli-
companion to
around the corner. ness and social isolation.
In this article, we extend the criti- someone who Social robots for eldercare? The
cisms that have been made of social ro- harms associated with loneliness
bots to digital companions and identify lives alone does and social isolation have been mobi-
new dangers associated with the use of lized as a justification for the devel-
not mean that
digital companions. It is possible that opment of robots since at least the
relationships with digital companions they are no longer early 1990s. Moved by fears that the
will allow people to feel less lonely. world—especially wealthy “north-
alone: They remain
However, this will almost certainly re- ern” societies in Europe and North
quire that users allow themselves to be socially isolated, America—is facing a “demographic
deceived about the nature of their digi- tsunami,” engineers started out try-
albeit with a digital
tal companion. Encouraging people ing to build “robot butlers” to help
to mistake imaginary friends for real companion to older people remain in their homes
friends is prima facie unethical. More longer.14,38 Unfortunately, this proj-
entertain them.
importantly, providing a digital com- ect proved too difficult, with the re-
panion to someone who lives alone sults being uncompetitive with other
does not mean that they are no longer assistive technologies.14,33 Perhaps
alone: They remain socially isolated, relatedly, some engineers pivoted to
albeit with a digital companion to en- the notion that robot pets, or other
tertain them. Encouraging people to artificial companions, might serve
have imaginary friends is no solution older people by playing a role in com-
to social isolation. Indeed, there is a batting loneliness and social isola-
real danger that this technology will tion.34 This idea became especially
instead lead to people having even less popular subsequent to the release of
contact with other human beings. Pro- Sony’s AIBO robot dog in 1999.
posals to use digital companions to Unfortunately, despite the enor-
combat loneliness and social isolation mous amount of media—and philo-
also underestimate the importance of sophical—attention devoted to elder-
touch, physical companionship, and care robots, the results of this project
mutual aid when it comes to human have also been underwhelming. Com-
well-being, especially in later life. panion robots are typically expen-
We have deliberately limited the sive, difficult to maintain, have lim-
scope of our discussion here to the ited functions, and are unable to hold
use of digital companions to address people’s attention for extended peri-
loneliness and social isolation. How- ods.14,16,41 There is little good-quality
ever, many of the arguments below evidence that introducing robots into
may also be relevant to the ethics of eldercare settings makes a meaning-
other uses of “digital humans” (see ful difference to people’s quality of
below) and/or to applications of AI life, especially in the long term.30,31
that might lead to people substituting What research does exist on this topic
relationships with machines for rela- often fails to account for the presence
tionships with human beings.a of the research team in the eldercare
setting or to include a control arm in
Two Technological “Solutions” to the trial design to determine the ex-
Loneliness and Social Isolation tent to which any effects they observe
There is an emerging school of are the result of the capacities of the
thought that claims that some tech- robot rather than of the introduc-
tion of a novel artifact.1 Our strong
a For the argument that replacing relationships suspicion is that to the extent that
with humans with relationships with artificial these technologies do work, they do
intelligences in healthcare contexts is mor- so by serving as a topic of conversa-
ally problematic, see Montemayor et al.24 For
tion among human beings who are
the argument that it is problematic in the
already co-present to each other and
context of tertiary education, see Sparrow and
Flenady.37 that this function can be performed
62 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | FEBRUARY 2026 | VOL. 69 | NO. 2
research and advances
equally well, if not better, by other, Unlike social robots, digital hu- in the history of discussions of com-
less high-tech interventions.19,32 That mans are cheap and easily scalable, puter-human relations—back to the
does not mean that social robots can- and can be easily maintained and Turing Test at least—and continues
not play a useful role in eldercare set- quickly updated. In the not-too-dis- to be influential today.5 Yet the fact
tings, but it does suggest that they tant future they are likely to be ubiq- that we cannot tell two things apart
have limited utility when it comes to uitous in online customer-service does not establish that they are the
addressing loneliness and social iso- roles. same—we may just be poorly placed
lation more generally. Predictably, this technology is be- to perceive the difference. Even if
Digital companions. While the ing hailed for its potential to combat those relating to digital humans
“promise” of social robots remains loneliness and even, according to cannot tell them apart from real
unrealized, a new technology, “digi- some scholars, social isolation.17,18,23 people on a video call, it will remain
tal humans,” has recently emerged, Following Sherry Turkle,42 we will obvious that digital humans are not
which we judge has much more po- call digital humans employed for this real people due to their inability to
tential to engage and entertain peo- purpose digital companions.c Already, occupy physical space outside of a
ple. Digital humans are AI-enhanced a large number of people are interact- smartphone or computer. For the
chatbots that present on screen as hu- ing with digital companions via an moment, despite occasional high-
man and accompany their utterances application called Replika, which al- profile defections from this consen-
with appropriate gestures, body lan- lows users to customize an avatar of a sus, it remains obvious to those who
guage, and even facial expressions human being to be their digital com- design chatbots that they are not
by means of sophisticated graphics panion and talk with it on a range of sentient and do not have real emo-
technology.18 topics.22,28 tions.10 Even when this ceases to be
The advent of ChatGPT and other obvious, this alone will not be suf-
generative AI systems based on large Imaginary Friends ficient to establish that machines
language models (LLMs) means that Any adequate account of the pros- are sentient or have real emotions:
chatbots are now capable of sustain- pects for digital companions must It may simply mean that we have
ing extended natural language con- begin by acknowledging that actually reached the limits of our capacities
versations on almost any topic via a existing—as opposed to science fic- to see that they are not and do not.
screen and keyboard. Advances in tional—AI systems are not sentient, The “Turing Triage Test,” which
speech recognition and speech syn- do not have real emotions, and do not asks when it might be justifiable
thesis now allow users to have spo- care about the people with whom they to let a human being die in order to
ken natural-language conversations are interacting. While this remains save the “life” of a machine, suggests
with digital humans.b Although the true, all that digital companions can that the intellectual and moral costs
digital humans available today are offer is an imitation of a relationship of claiming that machines are sen-
very obviously animations, advances with another sentient being rather tient would be substantial.35 It also
in both the software and hardware than the real thing. Friendship is a suggests that what would need to be
used to generate images on comput- relationship between two people. At true of machines, and our relation-
ers hold out the prospect of photo- best, then, non-sentient digital com- ships with them, in order to render
realistic animations of human faces panions can only be ersatz, or imagi- the claim that they are sentient plau-
and bodies. Hollywood films already nary, friends. sible is much more demanding than
feature animated characters that are That existing digital humans can- is usually recognized. Should AIs
hard to distinguish from human ac- not really be friends with people be- ever “wake up” and become sentient,
tors; new AI “deepfake” technology cause they are not real humans might then the ethics of our relationships
means that it is becoming easier to seem too obvious to point out. Nev- with them will change radically. Pre-
generate such animations. Finally, ertheless, it is worth pointing out be- sumably it would be possible to be
by training an AI on photos, video, cause of a tendency in the literature “friends” with a sentient machine
audio, and text generated by an ex- on AI and social robots to assume and for sentient AIs to care about
isting or historical individual, it is that if people cannot tell the differ- people. Quite why a sentient AI would
possible to create a digital avatar of ence between two things, then they want to spend its time entertaining
that person that looks and sounds must have the same properties and, and caring for lonely and socially
like them. Eventually it may be hard by implication, must therefore be the isolated humans is another matter.
to tell whether the “person” one is same. This line of thought runs deep Moreover, programming or creating
talking with on Skype, Zoom, Teams, sentient machines with a desire to
Facetime, or some other video chat serve as digital companions for hu-
c Strictly speaking, the digital humans that
application is a human being or a so- mans would raise profound ethical
concern us here are a subset of those entities
phisticated AI chatbot. that Turkle describes as “digital companions” issues—if it would be possible at all.
because Turkle rightly allows that digital In any case, our concern here is solely
animals might also be used for this purpose with digital companions that are not
b At the time of writing, it was possible to experi- and because Turkle includes robots in this
sentient.
ence a conversation with an impressive digital category. Our concern is with “purely” digital
May reduce loneliness. We believe
human by visiting the website: https://www. companions and only with those that present
digitalhumans.com/. themselves as human. that, unlike existing social robots,
FEBRUARY 2026 | VOL. 69 | NO. 2 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 63
research and advances
digital humans may succeed in en- their existing social connections, the need for the product, absent very
gaging and entertaining people for and form new connections, with hu- strong regulation, the market for dig-
lengthy periods. After all, eventually man beings. However, providing a ital companions, which is closely ad-
it will be possible to experience, by person who lives alone, without any jacent to the market for video games
means of a digital human, a simula- meaningful social connections, with and other entertainments, is highly
crum of any interaction that one can a digital companion will not, in itself, unlikely to be one.
have with a real human online. To make them any less socially isolated.
the extent that social interactions via Imaginary friends do not count when Lessons from the Literature
videoconferencing allow people to considering the number of social con- on Social Robots
feel less lonely, we anticipate that at nections an individual has. Because engineers have been trying
least some people will feel less lonely As social facilitators? Thus far, we to build social robots to combat lone-
as a consequence of interactions with have been concerned with the extent liness and social isolation in older cit-
digital companions. to which interactions with digital izens for at least three decades, there
The caveat here is not insignifi- companions themselves may impact is a correspondingly large literature
cant. The impact of videoconferenc- on loneliness and social isolation. on the ethical issues associated with
ing, as with social media more gener- Another way that digital compan- this project. We believe that many
ally, on social isolation in particular ions might combat these problems of the criticisms of social robots for
but also on loneliness, remains con- is if they were designed to encour- eldercare have force against the de-
troversial.3 There is some evidence age users to form and/or strengthen velopment and use of digital com-
that people need contact with other social connections with real people, panions to combat loneliness and
human beings in real life in order by, for instance, reminding them to social isolation. For reasons of space,
to feel happy and that virtual inter- wish their relatives happy birthday or though, we focus here on only four
actions may attenuate rather than encouraging them to participate in lines of criticism.
strengthen social connections.12,43 social activities that might facilitate Designing to deceive. One powerful
Nevertheless, interactions with social connections.9,18 Ideally, digi- criticism of social robots for eldercare
digital companions might meet some tal companions would be designed settings is that they are premised on
of the social and psychological needs to help users develop sufficient, and users believing them to have proper-
that people ordinarily satisfy through sufficiently rewarding, social rela- ties that they do not.4,32,34,43 In particu-
social contact with people.d More pro- tionships such that they no longer lar, in order to sustain interactions
saically, they might reduce loneliness wanted to interact with a digital com- with such artifacts over long periods,
by entertaining users so that they panion.e they must believe that the robot has
miss social contact less. Anecdotal Unfortunately, we suspect that emotional states and cares about how
reports suggest that Replika allows the designers and manufacturers of it is treated. Designing such artifacts
some users to feel less lonely22 and digital companions will have strong means designing them so that users
there is limited empirical evidence incentives to do otherwise. In order are deceived about their capacities.
that other digital companions may to encourage people to pay for access Such “designing to deceive” is prima
have an impact on loneliness.9,23,29,39 to digital companions, or to monetize facie unethical.32,38
More sophisticated versions of these the time that users spend interacting This criticism has obvious force
technologies might be even more with digital companions by display- against the design of digital compan-
successful in this regard. Given the ing advertisements to users, design- ions. At the time of writing, the front
distress and harms associated with ers of these systems will need to make page of the desktop version of Replika
loneliness, this is a significant virtue them as engaging—indeed as “ad- features the text, “The AI companion
of this technology. dictive”—as possible. For instance, who cares. Always here to listen and
Do not reduce social isolation. Al- Replika is gamified extensively to try talk. Always on your side.”28 None of
though interactions with digital com- to increase the amount of time users these claims are true. Replikas do not
panions might reduce loneliness, in spend on the application and also the care about anyone or anything—they
and of themselves they will have no amount they will pay to access vari- are not sentient and thus, by defini-
impact on social isolation. The quali- ous special features that are not avail- tion, do not feel anything at all. They
fication “in and of themselves” is in- able to users of the free version of the do not really listen to users or say
tended to highlight the important app. Although there are some mar- anything: They respond to keyboard
caveat that, as we discuss below, digi- kets—for instance, for pharmaceuti- or audio prompts with a pastiche of
tal companions could be designed cals or wound-care products—where words generated using complex sta-
to encourage users to strengthen companies flourish by selling prod- tistical techniques applied to the
ucts that are designed to eliminate content of the World Wide Web. Nor
d Although see Perry27 for an argument that AI is are Replikas on anyone’s side—they
in principle incapable of realizing emotional do not care at all about any humans.
or motivational empathy, which in turn sug- e Digital companions might also be designed to Replika’s designers are lying about its
gests that it may not be capable of meeting reduce loneliness that results from pathologi-
nature. They are doing so presumably
people’s need for empathic care when they are cally unrealistic expectations of social connec-
because users need to believe their
distressed or otherwise experiencing strong tions by serving as therapists in order to miti-
emotions. gate these expectations. Replika cares about them in order to
64 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | FEBRUARY 2026 | VOL. 69 | NO. 2
research and advances
care about it enough to keep using it for relationships with people.20,21,36,38
for an extended period. The claim that robots are a solution
Robots and respect. A second criti- to the problem of a shortage of elder-
cism, which, in part, follows from the care workers implies that robots will
first, is that the project of designing Imaginary friends be able to take on roles in the elder-
social robots for eldercare settings is care sector currently performed by
may outcompete
disrespectful to older people. Refer- humans. Yet every interaction that
ences to aging populations or “demo- real friends for our older people have with a robot is one
graphic tsunamis” in the motivations less opportunity for them to interact
for papers or research on eldercare time and attention with a human. The economics of the
robots treat the presence of older eldercare sector strongly suggest that
by appearing,
people in the population as itself a money saved by replacing people in
problem to be solved. Robots are pos- superficially, to be existing roles with robots will not be
tulated as the solution, despite the reinvested in roles that might provide
better friends.
fact they would not be considered people with more human contact.38
desirable were they to be directed Perversely, were this technology to be
toward the needs of younger people. fully realized, there is every chance
Investment in research into robots that it would lead to a substantial in-
continues, nonetheless, because old- crease in social isolation.
er people are almost never involved We believe that the risk that ersatz
in setting research priorities around companions might increase social
eldercare or in the design of techno- isolation is even more pressing when
logical solutions to problems faced by it comes to digital companions, in
older people.38 part simply because we think digi-
It might be argued that these criti- tal companions may work to reduce
cisms have less force against digital loneliness whereas social robots are
companions than they do against so- unlikely to.34
cial robots for eldercare because dig- Imaginary friends may outcom-
ital companions are typically adver- pete real friends for our time and at-
tised as intended for the lonely and tention by appearing, superficially, to
socially isolated in general, not just be better friends.f Digital companions
for older persons. However, this larg- have a number of advantages relative
er cohort, “lonely and socially iso- to human beings when it comes to
lated persons,” plays essentially the their capacity to sustain engagement
same role in the literature on digital with users. Most obviously, they can
companions as “older persons” does be available any time, day or night,
in the literature on social robots, 365 days a year. Moreover, unlike real
and the attitudes this literature ex- people, their sole purpose can be to
presses toward this cohort are prob- satisfy the user’s desires. They will
lematic for the same reasons. Those never be rude, selfish, thoughtless,
experiencing loneliness and/or social or judgmental—unless their being
isolation are implicitly “othered” in so will itself contribute to increased
discussions of digital companions, engagement.g Thus, not only might
treated as a problem to be solved. online interactions with digital com-
Those designing, developing, or tout-
ing digital companions as cures for f As an anonymous referee encouraged us to ac-
loneliness and social isolation sel- knowledge, one circumstance in which people
might be better off with a relationship with
dom, if ever, suggest that they them-
a digital companion than a human being is
selves aspire to a life lived alongside
when the relationship with the human being
only machines. Almost by definition, was an abusive or immiserating one. In such
lonely and socially isolated people cases, though, it is not that the digital com-
play little role in discussions about panion would be a better friend—as we have
argued here, they would not be a friend at all—
how—or, indeed, whether—this tech-
but rather that the person concerned would
nology should be developed.
actually be better off being more socially iso-
Replacing real relationships. A lated than maintaining the relationship with
third central concern in the debate the abuser.
about the ethics of using social ro- g The role played by the “difficult” behavior of
pets in establishing our love for them, as well
bots for eldercare is the extent to
as the fact that the designers of robot pets aim
which this might lead to older per-
to have their creations behave “badly” on occa-
sons being deprived of opportunities sion for the same reason, is noted in Sparrow.34
FEBRUARY 2026 | VOL. 69 | NO. 2 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 65
research and advances
panions crowd out real relationships enough to establish that one is lead-
from users’ lives, but they might also ing a flourishing human life: If it were,
change what users expect from their one could treat loneliness and social
friends to the point that relationships isolation purely pharmaceutically. It
with real people are seen as unsatisfy- If people do in fact is much more plausible to hold that a
ing in comparison.18,43 good human life includes various ob-
feel less lonely
Importantly, that relationships jectively good things, including, for
with digital companions might sub- as a result of instance, health, beauty, love, friend-
stitute for relationships with real ship, and social affirmation. As this
people is an assumption of the argu- having imaginary list suggests, many of these goods are
ment that digital companions offer associated with relationships with
friends, they may
a potential technological solution to those around us and, as such, cannot
loneliness and social isolation: If they be less likely be secured through interactions with
cannot, then digital companions will non-sentient machines. In particular,
to demand that
not reduce loneliness or (less plausi- social robots are not able to provide
bly) social isolation, as their propo- governments and/ people with the respect and social
nents hope. Moreover, it is hard to recognition that affirm individuals’
or the owners of
see how digital companions might be status as members of a community
engaging enough to be emotionally eldercare facilities and that are important components
rewarding (and thus cause people to of well-being according to any plausi-
provide them with
feel less lonely) but not so compelling ble theory of well-being.36 These criti-
as to compete with relationships with cisms also have force against digital
opportunities to
real people. More fundamentally, companions, which can provide only
insofar as relationships with digital establish social shallow imitations of these goods
companions reduce loneliness, they rather than the real thing.
connections with
will reduce users’ motivation to seek Some further limitations of digi-
out relationships with real people. real people. tal companions. Although digital
This means that the presence of digi- companions are more engaging than
tal companions in a community is existing social robots, they suffer in
likely to increase the social isolation comparison to social robots when
of third parties as well as users of dig- it comes to the extent to which they
ital companions. can satisfy other important human
The advent of digital companions needs—for touch, physical com-
may also exacerbate social isolation panionship, and for care expressed
by reducing the pressure on health- through assistance with physical
care systems and government agen- tasks.
cies to address the economic, social, Human beings have a powerful in-
and technological causes of loneli- nate need for creaturely touch. Skin
ness and social isolation. That is, the to skin (or fur) contact with other
development of digital companions humans or animals induces a pro-
will make it easy for governments nounced physiological response in
and owners of eldercare facilities human beings.13 There is now a large
to appear as though they are doing literature exploring the health bene-
something about social isolation by fits of relationships with animals45 as
providing citizens, or clients, with well as the harms associated with the
digital companions, even though absence of physical intimacy.40 Touch
these technologies will mostly leave is also ethically significant. In partic-
social isolation intact. If people do ular, care is often expressed through
in fact feel less lonely as a result of touch.
having imaginary friends, they may The importance of touch has not
be less likely to demand that govern- gone unnoticed by the designers of
ments and/or the owners of eldercare social robots, which now include a
facilities provide them with opportu- number of robot animals explicitly
nities to establish social connections advertised as allowing users to “pet”
with real people. them and to supposedly benefit from
What imaginary friends cannot do. doing so.11,44 The famed Japanese ro-
Fourth, and finally, these products boticist Hiroshi Ishiguro has even
are dangerous by virtue of their po- made a robot that is supposed to
tential to deprive users of important “transmit” hugs provided remotely by
objective goods. Being happy is not another human being.26 We are skep-
66 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | FEBRUARY 2026 | VOL. 69 | NO. 2
research and advances
tical of the extent to which touching notify them when it arrives. However, when a user threatens other people or
machines produces the benefits as- those who only have digital compan- expresses sexist, racist, or otherwise
sociated with touching people or ions will be lost if they need someone morally reprehensible views, may
animals, but it is clear that this is a to help them weed the garden or hold itself make its designers culpable.
domain where (purely) digital com- their hand to help them out of a car. Again, the boundaries of whether,
panions have nothing to offer. Although such tasks remain beyond when, and how digital companions
Another way in which digital com- the current capacities of robots, it is should intervene in response to trou-
panions are lacking is that they are at least conceivable that they might bling statements by, or patterns of
unable to provide users with physi- one day assist in this way. behavior from, their users will need
cal companionship more gener- Discussions of the prospects for to be determined by the broader com-
ally. Human beings respond to each digital companions have neglected munity. Unfortunately—or perhaps
other’s presence as well as to each the role played by touch, physical fortunately—these issues are beyond
other’s touch.20 As the dissatisfying companionship, and mutual aid in the scope of our discussion here.
experience of Zoom or Teams calls promoting human well-being.h Digi-
makes all too clear, the mere fact of tal companions will not be able to Conclusion
other people being physically present satisfy people’s need for these impor- Rising rates of loneliness and social
with us makes a difference. Physical tant goods. If the availability of digi- isolation in industrialized societ-
copresence also plays a role in the tal companions leads to reductions in ies constitute a “wicked problem”: It
formation of memories and narra- the number of real friends that peo- is little wonder that engineers and
tives that play a key role in social rela- ple have, as we have argued is highly policymakers are tempted by the idea
tionships: Going through something likely, then this technology will leave that there might be a technological
together helps people form social people worse off by virtue of depriving solution. Digital companions seem to
bonds. Granted, digital companions them of opportunities to experience have several advantages over the so-
and their users may come to have a touch or human companionship or to cial robots that have previously been
shared history of conversation and help each other with physical tasks, touted as having the potential to re-
online “experiences.” Digital com- as well as depriving them of recogni- duce these evils. We have argued that,
panions could, for instance, hark tion and respect. Insofar as the ab- nevertheless, digital companions can
back to conversations they have had sence of these goods causes people to be, at most, imaginary friends, which
with a user, games they have played feel lonely, the inability of imaginary can do little, if anything, to address
together, and other online experienc- friends to provide them may also af- social isolation, even if they do reduce
es that they have shared, in order to fect the extent to which digital com- loneliness in some cases. We have
affirm and strengthen their “relation- panions reduce loneliness. shown that powerful criticisms in the
ship.” However, there is a clear limit literature on the ethics of the design
to the capacity of digital companions Privacy, Representation, and use of social robots for eldercare
to share experiences and provide Manipulation, and Complicity settings also apply to digital compan-
companionship here. We have been concerned here with ions. In particular, there is a real risk
Finally, and relatedly, the provi- arguments that bear on the ques- that the development of digital com-
sion of help with real-world tasks is tion of whether digital companions panions will actually work to increase
an important mark and component should be used to combat loneliness social isolation. We have also sug-
of both solidarity and care. Helping and social isolation at all. Inevitably, gested that social robots might even
the people we love, for instance, by the use of digital companions would have a number of advantages relative
assisting them in walking up stairs, raise a further set of questions about to (purely) digital companions that
bringing them food, or bathing their design and operation. In partic- the literature on the latter topic has
them, is an expression of our love for ular, issues about the privacy of users thus far neglected.
them. When we help each other in loom large given the intimate nature The implications of these observa-
this way—“mutual aid”—we affirm of the data that would be collected by tions for the larger debate about the
our recognition of our mutual worth. digital companions.18 The design of wisdom of deploying digital compan-
Digital companions are obviously se- digital companions raises issues in ions are more complex than might
verely limited in what they can con- media ethics, about the representa- first appear. It is loneliness—rather
tribute in this regard. Again, this is tion of people of different races and than social isolation per se—that
not to deny that digital companions genders, and about the responsibility makes people miserable. Any tech-
could provide some forms of help to of creators for the impact of the art nology or policy that might reduce
their users. A sophisticated digital they create. Digital companions will loneliness therefore deserves to be
companion might, for instance, make offer unparalleled opportunities to taken seriously. If, in particular cas-
a doctor’s appointment for a user, re- shape the personalities of—indeed, es, the choice is really between an in-
mind them to take a list of the medi- to manipulate—their users, which dividual having no companions or a
cations that they are currently on to suggests that their design would need digital companion, they may well be
the appointment, provide advice on to be strictly regulated.18 Conversely, better off with a digital companion
what time they need to leave home to in some circumstances, the failure that allows them to feel less lonely.
get there, order a taxi for them, and of a digital companion to intervene Yet social isolation is also arguably
FEBRUARY 2026 | VOL. 69 | NO. 2 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 67
research and advances
objectively bad, as well as being bad 26. Ogawa, K.et al. Telenoid: Tele-presence android for
References
communication. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Emerging
for people’s health, even when they 1. Bemelmans, R., Gelderblom, G.J., Jonker, P., and De
Technologies. ACM (2011).
are not lonely. Although some of the Witte, L. Socially assistive robots in elderly care: A 27. Perry, A. AI will never convey the essence of human
systematic review into effects and effectiveness. J.
empathy. Nat. Hum. Behav. 7, 11 (2023), 1808–1809.
effects of social isolation on human Am. Med. Dir. Assoc. 13, 2 (2012), 114–120.
28. Replika. The AI companion who cares. Always here
2. Cacioppo, J.T. and Patrick, W. Loneliness: Human
health are probably the product of to listen and talk. Always on your side (2023); https://
Nature and the Need for Social Connection, 1st ed.
replika.ai/
the loneliness that typically accom- W.W. Norton & Co. (2008).
29. Ring, L., Shi, L., Totzke, K., and Bickmore, T. Social
3. Choi, N.G., Hammaker, S., DiNitto, D.M., and Marti,
panies social isolation, others prob- support agents for older adults: Longitudinal affective
C.N. COVID-19 and loneliness among older adults:
computing in the home. J. Multimodal User Interfaces
ably are not. For instance, those who Associations with mode of family/friend contacts 9, 1 (2015), 79–88.
and social participation. Clin. Gerontol. 45, 2 (2022),
are socially isolated are less likely to 30. Scoglio, A.A.J., Reilly, E.D., Gorman, J.A., and Drebing,
390–402.
C.E. Use of social robots in mental health and well-
be encouraged by those around them 4. Coghlan, S., Waycott, J., Lazar, A., and Neves, B.B. being research: Systematic review. J. Med. Internet
Dignity, autonomy, and style of company. Proc. ACM
to seek medical help and less likely to Hum. Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW1 (2021), Article no. Res. 21, 7 (2019), e13322.
31. Servaty, R.et al. Implementation of robotic devices in
benefit from the help with daily living 104. nursing care. Barriers and facilitators: An integrative
5. Danaher, J. Welcoming robots into the moral circle: A
that other people can provide. defence of ethical behaviourism. Sci. Eng. Ethics. 26, 4 review. BMJ Open 10, 9 (2020), e038650.
32. Sharkey, A. and Sharkey, N. We need to talk about
The prospect of a technology that (2020), 2023–2049. deception in social robotics!. Ethics Inf. Technol. 23, 3
6. Donovan, N.J. and Blazer, D. Social isolation and
might reduce loneliness but increase loneliness in older adults: Review and commentary of (2021), 309–316.
33. Sorell, T. and Draper, H. Robot carers, ethics, and older
social isolation, as we have argued a National Academies report. Am J. Geriatr. Psychiatry people. Ethics Inf. Technol. 16, 3 (2014), 183–195.
28, 12 (2020), 1233–1244.
34. Sparrow, R. The march of the robot dogs. Ethics Inf.
is likely true of digital companions, 7. Dunbar, R.I. Why friendship and loneliness affect our
Technol. 4, 4 (2002), 305–318.
therefore forces us to confront dif- health. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1545, 1 (2025), 52–65. 35. Sparrow, R. The Turing triage test. Ethics Inf. Technol.
8. Feng, X. and Astell-Burt, T. Lonelygenic environments:
6, 4 (2004), 203–213.
ficult trade-offs. Should we reduce A call for research on multilevel determinants of
36. Sparrow, R. Robots in aged care: A dystopian future?.
loneliness. Lancet Planet Health 6, 12 (2022), e933–
people’s misery at the cost of making AI Soc. 31, 4 (2016), 445–454.
e934.
37. Sparrow, R. and Flenady, G. Bullshit universities: The
them objectively worse off by virtue 9. Gasteiger, N., Loveys, K., Law, M., and Broadbent, E.
future of automated education. AI Soc. (Apr. 2025).
Friends from the future: A scoping review of research
of being more socially isolated? Is it 38. Sparrow, R. and Sparrow, L. In the hands of
into robots and computer agents to combat loneliness
machines? The future of aged care. Minds Mach. 16,
more important to express respect in older people. Clin. Interv. Aging 16, (2021), 941–971. (2006), 141–161.
10. Grant, N. and Metz, C. Google sidelines engineer
for people or to promote their happi- 39. Ta, V.et al. User experiences of social support from
who claims its A.I. is sentient. New York Times (Jun.
companion chatbots in everyday contexts: Thematic
ness? Will the development of digital 12, 2022); https://www.nytimes.com/2022/06/12/ analysis. J. Med. Internet Res. 22, 3 (2020), e16235.
technology/google-chatbot-ai-blake-lemoine.html
companions lead policymakers to be 11. Gustafsson, C., Svanberg, C., and Müllersdorf, M. 40. Thomas, P.A. and Kim, S. Lost touch? Implications
of physical touch for physical health. J. Gerontol. B
less motivated to pursue policies in- Using a robotic cat in dementia care: a pilot study. J. Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 76, 3 (2021), e111–e115.
Gerontol. Nurs. 41, 10 (2015), 46–56.
tended to reduce social isolation? An- 12. Hall, J.A., Dominguez, J., and Mihailova, T. 41. Tulli, S., Ambrosio, D.A, Najjar, A., and Rodríguez-Lera,
F.J. Great expectations & aborted business initiatives:
swering these questions will require Interpersonal media and face-to-face communication: The paradox of social robot between research and
Relationship with life satisfaction and loneliness. J.
paying close attention to the impact Happiness Stud. 24, 1 (2023), 331–350. industry. In BNAIC/BENELEARN 2019: Proceedings of
the Reference AI & ML conf. for Belgium, Netherlands
of this technology on the experience 13. Handlin, L.et al. Short-term interaction between dogs & Luxemburg (2019); https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2491/
and their owners: Effects on oxytocin, cortisol, insulin
short24.pdf
and relationships of users and those and heart rate—an exploratory study. Anthrozoös 24,
42. Turkle, S. Authenticity in the age of digital
around them. It will also require us to 3 (2011), 301–315. companions. Interact. Stud. 8, 3 (2007), 501–517.
14. Higgs, P. and Gilleard, C. Techno-fixes for an ageing
43. Turkle, S. Alone Together: Why We Expect More from
confront deep ethical and philosoph- society. Aging Ment. Health 26, 7 (2022), 1303–1305.
Technology and Less from Each Other. Basic Books
15. Holt-Lunstad, J. et al. Loneliness and social isolation
ical questions: about what we owe to (2011).
as risk factors for mortality: A meta-analytic review.
44. Wada, K. and Shibata, T. Living with seal robots—Its
each other, about what it is to lead a Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 10, 2 (2015), 227–237.
sociopsychological and physiological influences on
16. Hung, L.et al. The benefits of and barriers to using a
good human life, and about the sort the elderly at a care house. IEEE Trans. Robot. 23, 5
social robot PARO in care settings: A scoping review.
(2007), 972–980.
of world we want to create with AI. A BMC Geriatr. 19 (2019), Article no. 232. 45. Wells, D.L. The state of research on human–animal
17. Jecker, N.S. My friend, the robot: An argument
future in which people spend all their relations: Implications for human health. Anthrozoös
for e-friendship. In 2021 30th IEEE Intern. Conf.
32, 2 (2019), 169–181.
time at home with their imaginary on Robot & Human Interactive Communication.
IEEE (2021), 692–697.
friends without ever touching, or be- 18. Jecker, N.S., Sparrow, R., Lederman, Z., and Robert Sparrow (robert.sparrow@monash.edu) is a
ing touched by, another human being Ho, A. Digital humans to combat loneliness professor of philosophy at Monash University, Melbourne,
and social isolation: Ethics concerns and policy Australia.
is, we submit, a future to be avoided. recommendations. Hastings Cent. Rep. 54, 1 (2024),
Whether it will be possible to develop 7–12. James Brown is an independent scholar based in
19. Johnson, E. Pepper as imposter. Sci. Technol. Stud. 37, Melbourne, Australia.
and use digital companions to com- 3 (2024), 62–70.
bat loneliness and social isolation 20. Lederman, Z. Technological solutions to loneliness— This work is licensed under a
are they enough? Bioethics 37, 33 (2023), 275–284. Creative Commons Attribution
without bringing about such a world 21. Lederman, Z. and Jecker, N. Social robots to fend International 4.0 License.
remains to be seen. off loneliness? Kennedy Inst. Ethics. J. 33, 3 (2023),
249–276. © 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
22. Loffhagen, E. ‘I’m sick and tired of dating actual
Acknowledgments people’—Meet the men falling in love with their AI
girlfriends. The Standard (Aug. 9, 2023); https://www.
The authors would like to thank Si- standard.co.uk/insider/rise-of-ai-chatbot-girlfriends-
replika-b1098144.html
mon Coghlan for suggestions as to
23. Loveys, K., Sagar, M., Pickering, I., and Broadbent, E.
relevant sources in the literature on A digital human for delivering a remote loneliness
and stress intervention to at-risk younger and older
human-animal relations. Professor
adults during the COVID-19 pandemic: Randomized
Sparrow is an associate investigator pilot trial. JMIR Ment. Health 8, 11 (2021), e31586.
24. Montemayor, C., Halpern, J., and Fairweather, A. In
in the Australian Research Coun- principle obstacles for empathic AI: Why we can’t
cil Centre of Excellence for Auto- replace human empathy in healthcare. AI Soc. 37, 4
(2022), 1353–1359. Watch the authors discuss
mated Decision-making and Society 25. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and this work in the exclusive
(Grant number CE200100005) and Medicine. Social isolation and loneliness in older Communications video.
adults: Opportunities for the health care system. The https://cacm.acm.org/videos/
worked on this article in this role. National Academies Press (2020). imaginary-friends
68 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | FEBRUARY 2026 | VOL. 69 | NO. 2
