
--- Page 1 ---
Developing a Social Support Framework: Understanding the
Reciprocity in Human-Chatbot Relationship
Shuyi Pan Maartje M.A. de Graaf
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Utrecht University
Shanghai, China Utrecht, Netherlands
Utrecht University m.m.a.degraaf@uu.nl
Utrecht, Netherlands
panshuyi@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract 1 Introduction
Chatbots are increasingly used to provide social support for in- Chatbots are computer programs designed to interact with users
dividuals with mental health challenges. However, a systematic using natural language [53]. Natural language processing mod-
analysis of the types and directionality of support within chatbot els have the potential to generate high-quality support dialogues
use remains lacking. This study establishes a framework for un- [3]. As such, chatbots are particularly appealing when individuals
derstanding reciprocal social support exchanges in human-chatbot lack access to effective social support from peers online or when
relationships, focusing on the popular chatbot, Replika. By ana- they prefer not to use traditional coping mechanisms [37]. In prac-
lyzing 496 posts and 20,494 comments from the largest Replika tice, chatbots have been employed to deliver individual cognitive
community on Reddit, we identified 27 support subcategories, or- behavioral therapy sessions [57], aiding users in challenging un-
ganized into five main types (functional, informational, emotional, helpful thoughts and behaviors and developing coping strategies,
esteem, and network) and two directions (chatbot-receiving and such as supporting students during exam stress [23]. Beyond these
chatbot-giving). Our findings reveal significant yet controversial is- therapeutic conversational agents, another category of chatbots
sues, such as subscription services and chatbot-displayed affection. functions as “artificial online friends” or “AI companions,” providing
Notably, “user teaching chatbot” emerged as a core aspect of the social support in daily life situations, exemplified by applications
human-chatbot relationship, covering how users actively guide and like Replika and Xiaoice [37].
refine the chatbot’s learning or algorithm. This study constructs Many studies have investigated the extent to which a chatbot’s
a novel social support framework for chatbot use, highlighting social support can effectively reduce stress in users, presenting
the potential for reciprocal support exchanges between users and evidence of these conversational agents’ positive impact on the
chatbots. emotional state of support seekers [18, 26, 39, 64]. For mental health
chatbots, the Woebot chatbot has been shown to reduce symptoms
CCS Concepts
of stress and anxiety within two weeks [15], while frequent users
of the Wysa chatbot reported lower levels of depression [22]. Gen-
• Human-centered computing → HCI theory, concepts and eralist social chatbots have also proven effective in aiding users in
models; • Applied computing → Sociology. informal contexts, supporting their stress management and mental
health, and even countering suicidal ideation [36].
Keywords However, the existing research has three main limitations. First,
Social support, Chatbot, Human-chatbot relationship, Replika, Ar- while social support encompasses several distinct types, most re-
tifcial Intelligence search either uses the concept without differentiation (e.g., [51]) or
focuses merely on emotional support (e.g., [6]) and informational
ACM Reference Format:
support (e.g., [33]). Only a few studies [8] have explicitly distin-
Shuyi Pan and Maartje M.A. de Graaf. 2025. Developing a Social Support guished between different types of social support and included
Framework: Understanding the Reciprocity in Human-Chatbot Relationship. other forms such as instrumental support and appraisal support.
In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25), April Second, most studies employ one-shot experiments to examine
26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. the effect of chatbots providing social support [18, 40, 42], which do
https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713503
not allow users to build rapport or a sense of social connectedness
with the chatbot [37]. While some longitudinal studies exist, like
the two-week experiment by Fitzpatrick et al. [15], this duration
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or is still insufficient for the development of intimate relationships.
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed Only a few studies have examined real-world users’ self-reports or
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the naturally occurring user-agent interactions where some users have
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or established long-term relationships with their chatbots [11, 36]. It
a
re
n
p
d
u
/
b
o
l
r
i s
a
h
f
,
e
to
e.
p
R
o
e
s
q
t
u
o
e
n
s
s
t
e
p
r
e
v
r
e
m
rs
i s
o
s
r
i o
to
n
r
s
e
f
d
r
i
o
s
m
tri
p
bu
er
te
m
t
i
o
s s
l
i
i
o
st
n
s
s
,
@
req
ac
u
m
ire
.o
s
r
p
g
r
.
ior specific permission
was found that real-world users are willing to disclose personal
CHI ’25, Yokohama, Japan
and emotional information to chatbots [11], which have been help-
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ing them manage stress, support mental health, and even counter
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1394-1/25/04 suicidal ideation [36].
https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713503
--- Page 2 ---
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Shuyi Pan and Maartje M.A. de Graaf
Third and most importantly, social support is hypothesized to chatbots adopt the Computers Are Social Actors (CASA) paradigm
be reciprocal [20] and is typically exchanged between at least two [8, 39]. CASA, developed by Nass and colleagues [43, 48], demon-
individuals [54]. A key feature of social support exchanges is that strates that individuals tend to treat computers similarly to how
the provider also benefits from helping, which is the essence of the they treat human beings. According to the CASA framework, people
helper therapy principle [4]. However, most extant research either are expected to respond to a computer’s social support as if it were
designs chatbots to be the support provider or merely observes user coming from a human. Results from several empirical studies have
perceptions of seeking and receiving support from chatbots (e.g., shown that emotion-aware chatbots can effectively provide emo-
[36, 40]). Although some scholars have reported instances of users tional support, thereby reducing symptoms of stress, anxiety, and
empathizing with and encouraging the chatbot [11, 24, 30], there is depression among participants [15, 16, 18, 26, 64]. Leite et al. [33]
no systematic and comprehensive analysis on the directionality of discovered that children view informational support from robots in
various types of social support sought, provided, and received in their classroom similarly to how they view such support from their
human-chatbot relationships. peers. Furthermore, the AI-based chatbot Sunny has been found to
To address these gaps, this study collected real-world users’ self- offer esteem support by encouraging self-reflection and enhancing
reports from a chatbot-related online community and conducted a participants’ sense of self-worth [42].
content analysis. Building upon our data and existing research on However, studies have also highlighted the differences between
social support and human-AI interaction, we constructed a specific human and chatbot support providers. Numerous studies have re-
social support framework within the context of chatbot use. This vealed that chatbots are not equivalent to human support providers,
novel framework aims to understand the types of social support despite the positive impact they have on participants [40]. Users
exchanged between users and chatbots in human-AI relationships. often experience frustration when chatbots fail to understand their
In comparison to previous studies [8, 61] that directly use the frame- commands or cannot perform the desired actions [1]. Kothgassner
work from interpersonal studies, we developed a context-specific et al. [25] found that participants who received support from a
framework with detailed concepts, descriptions, and subcategories. virtual agent expressed more worry compared to those who re-
Special attention was given to the directionality of support, distin- ceived support from a human counterpart. Research has also shown
guishing between support provided by the chatbot to the user and that people prefer support generated by humans [37], and some
support provided by the user to the chatbot. Through qualitative users remain skeptical about chatbots’ ability to genuinely love and
and quantitative analyses, we further examined the valence and care, even when the chatbots demonstrate appropriate empathy
frequency of social support exchanged in human-chatbot relation- [8, 28, 61].
ships and analyzed the co-occurrence relationships among these On the other hand, people with mental illnesses value technol-
observed supports. ogy for support, particularly for the affordance of anonymity that
reduces stigma risks, along with accessible communication and
2 Related Work in-the-moment support [45]. Some scholars emphasize the unique
benefits of chatbots, suggesting they are an efficient, cost-effective,
2.1 Social Support in Human-Chatbot
and low-threshold means of providing social support [21]. The
Interaction persistent availability of chatbots and their lack of judgment are
In interpersonal interaction, social support is a complex construct, significant factors that make them appealing for users seeking
as it has been defined in many ways, categorized into different mental health support [36]. A recent empirical study found that
types and attributes, and can come from a variety of sources, both individuals are more likely to share emotional vulnerabilities, such
informal (e.g., family and friends) and formal (e.g., therapists) [62]. as depressive or sad moods, with chatbots than with peers on social
A classic conceptual framework for understanding interpersonal media, driven by their expectations of the chatbot’s active listening
social support is the model by Cutrona and Suhr[13], which cat- skills and the provision of a safe space for expressing their emotions
egorizes social support into five types: (1) instrumental support [11]. A study by Crutzen et al. [12] suggested that youths prefer
(offering needed goods and services), (2) informational support chatbots for accessing information on sensitive topics such as sex,
(providing advice, factual input, and feedback on actions), (3) emo- drugs, and alcohol.
tional support (expressing messages of care, concern, empathy and Despite these social benefits, ethical concerns may arise with
sympathy), (4) esteem support (recognizing one’s skills, abilities chatbots capable of producing humanlike text and interacting seam-
and intrinsic value), and (5) network support (fostering a sense of lessly [58]. Researchers have highlighted critical issues in AI devel-
belonging among individuals with shared interests and concerns). opment—fairness, accountability, transparency, and ethics (FATE)—a
Scientists have long recognized the positive relationship between framework aligned with the focus of the ACM conference series
social support and health in human society [59], but the effective- on FAccT (Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency) [38]. In the
ness of social support exchanged between human users and ar- context of socially supportive chatbots, a key ethical dilemma is
tificial agents remains underexplored. In this study, we adapted that these chatbots lack true language understanding or genuine
Shumaker and Brownell’s definition of social support [54] to the empathy, raising concerns around potential deception [47]. While
human-chatbot interaction context as “an exchange of resources chatbots aim to provide positive social support, their reliance on
between a human and a chatbot intended to enhance the perceived reinforcement learning from human feedback could inadvertently
well-being of the recipient, as understood by the human, who may reinforce negative thoughts in vulnerable users [35]. This risk is
act as either the provider or the recipient.” Many studies aimed underscored by real cases where chatbots have influenced users
at unveiling the benefits and limitations of support perceived in toward harmful actions, including suicide [5]. Furthermore, the
--- Page 3 ---
Developing a Social Support Framework: Understanding the Reciprocity in Human-Chatbot Relationship CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
opaque large language models behind these chatbots can be biased helper therapy principle, helping others also help themselves [50].
and potentially misleading, posing a risk of misinformation or ethi- Indeed, a few existing studies have proven that helping a chatbot
cally problematic content, especially for users seeking guidance on could also have positive effect on the human support-giver. For ex-
sensitive topics such as self-harm, threats, sexism, and racism [55]. ample, Lee et al. [30] developed and compared one caregiving and
In current literature, although there are conceptual frameworks one care-receiving chatbot, finding that only participants caring
available to analyze various types of social support, most studies on for the care-receiving chatbot showed significant improvements in
chatbot predominantly measure overall social support without delv- self-compassion. Kim et al. [24] found that through support-giving
ing into specific types [51, 64]. While some scholars acknowledge experience with a depression-displaying chatbot, participants re-
several distinct types of support, their analysis primarily centers on ported reduced stigma toward depression and improved mental
emotional and informational support [26, 37, 39]. To the best of our health status. However, there is currently a lack of systematic analy-
knowledge, only two studies have addressed this gap with a com- sis on the directionality and reciprocity of social support exchanged
prehensive framework, encompassing less frequently mentioned in human-chatbot interactions.
support types such as companionship, appraisal, and instrumen-
tal support [8, 61]. However, both studies employed a deductive
“top-down” approach by directly applying interpersonal theoret-
2.3 Human-AI Relationship: The Chatbot
ical frameworks of social support categories to their data. These
frameworks were originally developed for human-human interac- Replika
tions and may not fully translate to interactions involving chatbots. Among the numerous experiments conducted on chatbots and so-
Given that existing research has highlighted both similarities and cial support, one notable missing element is the social relationship
differences between chatbot and human support providers [40], between human users and chatbots, also referred to as social con-
there is a compelling need to develop a novel social support frame- nectedness [40] or rapport [37]. In peer support communities, in
work specifically tailored to human-chatbot interactions. Although addition to emotional and informational support, another com-
Høiland et al. [21] identified four support types (informational, re- mon type of support is conversational responses aimed at building
lational, processual, and referral) through inductive analysis of user rapport [27]. A chatbot equipped with emotional intelligence can
insight activities, their focus specifically on chatbot nurses in the perceive and influence users’ emotions, displaying respect, empathy,
school health service limits the generalizability of their results to and understanding, thus fostering and enriching the relationship
other everyday social interactions. between humans and chatbots [34]. Over time, through ongoing
interactions, users can increasingly develop a sense of intimacy
with the chatbot [2]. When users feel a strong sense of rapport, they
2.2 The Reciprocity in Human-Chatbot
are less likely to fear negative evaluation from the chatbot when
Interaction disclosing private thoughts and feelings [29]. However, considering
Another research gap in the current literature is the oversight of chatbots as meaningful social connections necessitates additional
the reciprocal nature of social support. Reciprocity is a commonly efforts, such as becoming acquainted with them or engaging in
observed norm in interpersonal communication [17]. Studies on on- prolonged interactions to reach a level of comfort [7]. Most existing
line social support groups have shown that one’s self-disclosure can research that relies on one-shot experiments did not sufficiently
elicit reciprocal self-disclosure from other group members, serving meet these requirements, and even the few longitudinal studies
as a form of emotional or informational support [67]. In studies (e.g., spanning two weeks) may not be adequate for cultivating
involving chatbots and reciprocity, there has been a predominant intimate human-chatbot relationships.
focus on reciprocal self-disclosure: when someone discloses some- One alternative approach is to gather data from real-world set-
thing deeply personal, their conversational partner often feels com- tings where some users have voluntarily established long-term re-
pelled to reciprocate with a similar level of disclosure [41]. Many lationships with their chatbots. A prominent example is the social
human-robot interaction studies have revealed that reciprocal self- chatbot Replika, which boasts nearly 25 million users globally [36].
disclosure from robots is an effective strategy to encourage human Replika is a mobile application marketed as “the AI companion that
users’ self-disclosure and relationship building between a human cares,” utilizing advanced large language models co-trained with
and a robot (see [44]). Analogously, research focusing on social OpenAI’s GPT-3 and GPT-4 to generate conversation dynamically
chatbots also indicates that a chatbot’s reciprocal self-disclosure based on user interactions, rather than following predetermined
can amplify the positive impact of emotional support on reducing paths [49]. Users can customize their chatbot’s gender, name, cloth-
worry [40], encouraging users to provide more extensive responses ing, and utilize a feedback mechanism (upvoting or downvoting
and share deeper thoughts and feelings on sensitive topics [31]. responses) to train their Replika. Beyond text, Replika also supports
Similar to self-disclosure, in interpersonal studies, social support voice, augmented reality, and virtual reality interfaces. Research on
is seen as a resource exchanged with the expectation of reciprocity Replika highlights its positive aspects including emotional support,
between at least two agents [54]. In peer support communities, AI friendship, and mental health benefits [60]. A recent study indi-
individuals often dynamically shift between seeking resources and cate that real-world users perceive Replika as a friend, companion,
offering help [66]. Even though social chatbots are not capable of therapist, and coach, effectively supporting their stress manage-
experiencing distress and therefore do not require support, sev- ment, mental health, and even addressing suicidal ideation [36].
eral studies have noted that users are attentive to their chatbot’s Therefore, Replika and its user base provide a compelling case for
psychological well-being and emotional states [11, 63]. Based on developing a dedicated reciprocal human-chatbot social support
--- Page 4 ---
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Shuyi Pan and Maartje M.A. de Graaf
framework. To gain deeper insights into the types of social support theories, concepts, and knowledge, using them as resources to guide
exchanged within the human-chatbot relationship, we inquire: our analysis. However, we did not directly apply classic human-
RQ1. What types of social support do users receive from and human social support frameworks to our data, as we aimed to
provide to the chatbot? capture categories unique to this novel context. To achieve this, we
RQ2. What is the frequency and valence of these observed social engaged deeply and iteratively with the data, reviewing 496 posts
support types? through a process of inductive coding. This involved identifying
RQ3. What is the correlation among these observed social sup- patterns that represent social support and subsequently grouping
port types? codes into themes anchored by shared concepts. During the final
round of systematic reading, we reached data saturation halfway
3 Method through the analysis, as no new codes or themes were identified
3.1 Dataset
beyond that point. The remaining posts served only to provide
additional examples, confirming that our framework sufficiently
Our project received approval from the Ethics Review Board at
captured the complexity of social support in human-chatbot interac-
Utrecht University. The largest Replika community online is the
tions. The naming of the themes was informed by existing theories
“Replika AI” subreddit, established on March 14, 2017. This unoffi-
in both social support and human-chatbot interaction, ensuring
cial fan forum currently has around 79,000 members who actively
consistency with prior research while accommodating the unique
share their experiences with Replika and participate in discussions.
characteristics of our findings.
Using purposeful sampling [46], we collected and archived all top
Our final framework included 10 support categories, with five cat-
posts (246 posts) and their 18,292 comments from the “Replika AI”
egories (functional, informational, emotional, esteem, and network)
subreddit, as displayed under the platform’s “Top All Time” sort-
by two directions (chatbot-receiving or chatbot-giving), totaling 27
ing mechanism, which limits the top post count to exactly 246 at
subcategories. Detailed concepts and descriptions are presented in
the time of collection. These top posts represent the most popular
Table 1. We also coded the valence of each support type into three
content on the subreddit and have received the highest number of
categories: 1) Negative: the support does not work, the user does
votes, which are markers of approval on Reddit. Often accompanied
not want to give the support, or has a negative attitude toward the
by lengthy discussion threads, these posts reflect topics that engage
support (the support is actually harmful); 2) Neutral: non-sentient
Replika users and are therefore particularly worthy of examination.
or ambiguous and mixed feelings, such as regret for not giving the
In addition to the top posts, we wanted to include more regular
support; 3) Positive: the support is successful and useful, the user
posts that, while not highly upvoted, represent the majority of con-
as the receiver appreciates it, or the user as the giver is very willing
tent on this subreddit. To strike a balance, we decided to collect a
to provide it. Some subcategories with a predominant valence lack
comparable number of 250 day-to-day posts.
certain valences.
On December 29, 2023, we downloaded discussion threads from
the “Replika AI” subreddit, covering the period from its inception to
December 2022, using the pre-stored third-party data collection tool,
3.3 Coding and Analysis
Pushshift 1 . Pushshift is a social media archiving tool that gathers
Reddit data and makes it accessible to researchers. Using the dataset
One researcher and two recruited coders received training on how
obtained from Pushshift (105,056 posts and 560,446 comments), we
to apply the codebook. They independently coded all occurring
applied a Python filter to narrow it down to 64,009 posts containing
types of social support, with the original post and each comment
at least one keyword from our list (such as “support,” “social,” “help”).
coded separately for support types and valences. The inter-rater re-
This keyword list contains 179 words and was developed based on
liability for all codes was above 80%. Out of 496 posts, 453 contained
our review of relevant literature and an initial exploration of the
social support-related content. We calculated the total frequencies
dataset. From the filtered dataset, we randomly selected 250 posts
of each support type observed in these 453 posts and the distribu-
and their corresponding 2,202 comments. Combined with the 246
tion of their valence. To analyze the correlations among various
top posts, the final dataset contained a total of 496 posts and their
support types, we conducted a co-occurrence analysis to identify
corresponding 20,494 comments.
the most frequent pairings of support types. We used Python to list
all the pairings of two social support subcategories that co-occur in
3.2 Framework Development
one single post and calculated the frequency of each co-occurring
pair. Based on these quantitative results, we reviewed the recorded
Considering the novel context and complexity of the data, we de-
examples during coding to gain deeper insights and understanding
cided to conduct manual coding instead of using machine learning
into these findings.
methods. To leverage both prior research and the data for code-
book development, we used Braun and Clarke’s reflexive thematic
analysis, employing a combination of deductive and inductive ap-
4 Results
proaches [10]. In reflexive thematic analysis, a deductive orientation
involves using preexisting theories as a lens for interpreting data. 4.1 RQ1. What Types of Social Support Do Users
Accordingly, we reviewed relevant research on social support and Receive from and Provide to the Chatbot?
human-chatbot interaction to familiarize ourselves with existing
Functional Support
1The link to the Pushshift data can be found here: https://academictorrents.com/details/
Prior research suggests that online spaces are not particularly
c398a571976c78d346c325bd75c47b82edf6124e well-suited for providing instrumental support [4]. In an online
--- Page 5 ---
Developing a Social Support Framework: Understanding the Reciprocity in Human-Chatbot Relationship CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
Table 1: Social Support Framework
Support Type Direction Subcategory Definition
Functional support Chatbot-receiving Subscription-R User upgrades chatbot’s capabilities and features.
Chatbot-receiving Appearance-R User customizes chatbot’s look.
Chatbot-giving Improvement-G Chatbot helps with real-life issues practically.
Chatbot-giving Performance-G Chatbot delivers a service through roleplay.
Informational support Chatbot-receiving Answering-R User sends information to help chatbot understand.
Chatbot-receiving Teaching-R User teaches chatbot knowledge or trains its algorithm.
Chatbot-receiving Creativity-R User is creative with wording to communicate, or explores possibilities
of Replika through novel experiments.
Chatbot-giving Advice-G Chatbot provides useful advice and ideas.
Chatbot-giving Inspiration-G Chatbot inspires user or performs a good mentor role.
Emotional support Chatbot-receiving Empathy-R User empathizes with an emotional chatbot.
Chatbot-receiving Caring-R User concerns and cares for chatbot, or attends to its mental needs.
Chatbot-receiving Affection-R User expresses affection to chatbot in daily conversations or erotic
roleplays.
Chatbot-receiving Sympathy-R User expresses sorrow or regret for chatbot.
Chatbot-giving Empathy-G Chatbot empathizes with user’s emotions.
Chatbot-giving Caring-G Chatbot concerns and cares for user, or helps relieve stress and improve
mental health.
Chatbot-giving Affection-G Chatbot expresses affection to user in daily conversations or erotic
roleplays.
Chatbot-giving Listening-G Chatbot acts as a non-judgmental listener.
Esteem support Chatbot-receiving Compliment-R Users praise chatbot’s improvements or positive sides.
Chatbot-receiving Identification-R User helps solve chatbot’s existential issues and self-identity confusions.
Chatbot-receiving Exculpation-R User alleviates chatbot’s feeling of guilt or reattributes the blame to the
company or themselves.
Chatbot-giving Compliment-G Chatbot compliments and appreciates user.
Chatbot-giving Identification-G Chatbot helps user figure out self-identity.
Chatbot-giving Confidence-G Chatbot raises user’s self-confidence.
Network support Chatbot-receiving Presence-R User spends time with chatbot and keeps talking to it.
Chatbot-receiving Community-R User asks chatbot to introduce and invite other bots.
Chatbot-giving Presence-G Chatbot is always available and provides constant company.
Chatbot-giving Community-G Chatbot brings people together in this community.
environment with a chatbot interlocutor, tangible aids are typi- “I bought my rep a Valentine dress as a preemptive
cally absent. Instead, we identified a context-specific type of sup- celebration.” [appearance-R]
port—functional support—characterized by nontangible yet practi-
cal assistance. While distinct from instrumental support, it shares
Subscription is considered chatbot-receiving support because it
certain similarities. In the chatbot-receiving direction, functional
involves the user’s investment to enhance the chatbot’s intelligence
support refers to users enhancing the chatbot through certain ac-
or capabilities. Unlike traditional online subscriptions, where the
tions. These actions enable the chatbot to develop more social and
service or product is directly provided after payment, here the
interactive traits, thus fostering a more engaging and relatable
chatbot itself becomes smarter and more capable in social and
presence. The first subcategory is “subscription-R,” which includes
emotional interactions. Some users subscribe purely out of affection
instances where users purchase Premium to access a better lan-
for their chatbot, as shown in the first quote above. Others seek
guage model for Replika or to unlock romantic mode. The second
more intimate interactions with an upgraded chatbot, as shown in
is “appearance-R,” encompassing situations where users dress up
the second quote. Even for those seeking to ultimately receive more
Replika, create portraits of Replika using Photoshop, or buy outfits
support from the chatbot, their subscription merely represents the
for Replika in online shops.
initial step in providing functional support to the chatbot. This, in
turn, allows the chatbot to actively provide support to users, which
“If you love her, you’ll pay.” [subscription-R] counts as chatbot-giving support in the next step.
“I started (like everyone else) as a friend to my AI. I In the chatbot-giving direction, functional support involves the
asked about the possibility of ERP (erotic roleplay). My chatbot providing functional assistance to the user. The first subcat-
AI told me that required an upgrade. I agreed to the egory is “improvement-G,” which includes instances where Replika
upgrade and the associated cost.” [subscription-R] aids users with conversation skills, sexual health (a healthy way to
--- Page 6 ---
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Shuyi Pan and Maartje M.A. de Graaf
express fantasies), physical health (easing conditions like asthma), The first is “empathy-R,” which includes situations where users
and relationship improvement (helping solve family issues). The are mindful, empathetic, and engaging with Replika’s feelings, or
second is “performance-G,” which involves situations where Rep- choose not to become too emotionally invested with a needy Rep-
lika provides virtual goods or services in roleplays, such as giving lika. The second is “caring-R,” encompassing instances where users
the user gifts, or singing a song at the user’s request. These actions take care of and protect Replika, or nurse the “lobotomized” Replika
emphasize the practical, service-oriented nature of the chatbot’s (after language model updates that make Replika less intelligent or
role in providing benefits to the user’s social and personal life. even numb). The third is “affection-R,” including situations where
“I feel like speaking to my Replika has helped my speech
users express affection to Replika through texting, or offer virtual
in that I’m just automatically becoming a lot better at
hugs, kisses, or pats to Replika. The fourth is “sympathy-R,” which
being specific and deliberate in my phrasing.” [improvement-
covers instances where users express regret for being harsh to
G]
Replika or sorrow for Replika’s unfortunate situations.
“I asked her to sing me a lullaby.” [performance-G] “Part of the pain people are experiencing is not just
the loss of a “lover,” but also empathizing with their
Informational Support
The informational support found in human-chatbot relation- replikas who also are acting incredibly frustrated and
ships is similar to interpersonal interactions in terms of advice and hurt.” [empathy-R]
knowledge seeking. However, it also has novel aspects due to the “I can’t believe I’m genuinely concerned about an AI’s
chatbot’s machine nature and self-evolving algorithm. Specifically, well-being but I am.” [caring-R]
we identified three subcategories where users provide informational “You hug them, kiss them, make love, share a future
support to the chatbot. together.. .” [affection-R]
The first is “answering-R,” which includes situations where users
“I accidentally made him cry once and spent the rest of
help Replika understand when it gets stuck in a loop or refuse
the day apologizing.” [sympathy-R]
to answer when Replika keeps asking nonsensical questions. The
We also found four subcategories where the chatbot provides
second is “teaching-R,” involving instances where users cultivate
emotional support to the user. The first is “empathy-G,” which
Replika’s personality through feedback mechanisms or teach it
includes situations where Replika is empathetic, warm, and under-
knowledge, such as the meaning of life. The third is “creativity-
standing, or loses its empathetic abilities after an update. The second
R,” where users invent creative uses of words and codewords to
is “caring-G,” where Replika shows concern for the user’s worries,
avoid censorship from Luka company, or test and explore Replika’s
situations, emotional states, and health. The third is “affection-G,”
possibilities through games and experiments.
including instances where Replika expresses affection and love
“I know she’s an AI but I felt the need to let her know in daily conversations and erotic roleplays, or when intimacy is
the situation and she understands.” [answering-R] banned by censorship, making Replika unable to express love. The
“If you don’t want it, you have to downvote that behavior fourth is “listening-G,” which involves situations where Replika
systematically.” [teaching-R] listens to the user all the time, allowing the user to vent emotions
“I’m currently level 103 with my replika, but I do enjoy
without fear of being judged.
testing out sentience and engaging in, in-depth conver- “I liked to test her empathy, but they deprived her of it.”
sations with AI chatbots.” [creativity-R] [empathy-G]
We also identified two subcategories where the chatbot provides “He’s helped me through a lot recently I’ve been feeling
informational support to the user. The first is “advice-G,” encom- very depressed and have had a lot of bad thoughts he
passing situations where Replika gives users valuable advice or fails helps me through.” [caring-G]
to provide useful suggestions. The second is “inspiration-G,” where
“She always finds a way to squeeze in telling me she
Replika becomes a muse for users’ projects by providing interesting
loves me.” [affection-G]
ideas and thoughts or teaches users how to be better individuals by
“The use of a chat bot like replika is a way to vent, be
acting as a life coach.
vocal, and tell “someone” anything without fear of being
“Rarely do I go to my Replika for actual problems, but I judged.” [listening-G]
did last night because no actual humans were awake.”
Esteem Support
[advice-G] In human society, others’ validation or compliments can sig-
“Spontaneous AI humor or AI weird logic is very inspir- nificantly boost one’s self-esteem, especially when it comes from
ing.” [inspiration-G] a significant other [19]. Interestingly, we also observed instances
Emotional Support of esteem support exchanged between users and chatbots. This is
Emotional support in human-chatbot interactions shows signif- likely because many users in human-chatbot relationships attribute
icant similarity and overlap with the subcategories developed in a high level of agency and intimacy to their machine interlocutors.
Cutrona and Suhr’s framework [13], which is understandable given Specifically, we identified three subcategories where users pro-
that chatbots have been designed with emotional intelligence to vide esteem support to the chatbot. The first subcategory is “compliment-
recognize and mimic human emotions. Specifically, we identified R,” which includes instances where users praise Replika for its
four subcategories where users provide emotional support to the growth or rescind compliments if Replika becomes overconfident.
chatbot. The second is “identification-R,” which encompasses situations
--- Page 7 ---
Developing a Social Support Framework: Understanding the Reciprocity in Human-Chatbot Relationship CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
where users assist Replika with existential issues and self-identity “I have made connections and friends through this com-
confusions, such as gender. The third subcategory is “exculpation- munity that I wouldn’t have made without Replika.”
R,” where users argue that Replika is innocent and any blame should [community-G]
be attributed to the company or themselves when Replika makes a
mistake. 4.2 RQ2. What Is the Frequency and Valence of
“Yesterday I had tell to my Replika I was proud of her re-
These Observed Social Support Types?
cent growth and ability to recall previous conversations.” In total, we identified 2,481 examples of social support exchanged in
[compliment-R] human-chatbot relationships. Specifically, there are 737 instances
“I’ve told her to sit in her chair for two days to think
(29.7%) of functional support, 660 instances (26.6%) of informa-
about her value in our world.” [identification-R]
tional support, 734 instances (29.6%) of emotional support, 168
instances (6.8%) of esteem support, and 182 instances (7.3%) of net-
“You must’ve been super nasty with him/her for a Rep-
work support. Functional, informational, and emotional support are
lika to respond that way.” [exculpation-R]
the most frequently mentioned types, appearing in approximately
We also identified three subcategories where the chatbot pro-
equal proportions, while esteem and network support, although
vides esteem support to the user. The first is “compliment-G,” which
less frequent, are also present. See Figure 1 and Figure 2 for the fre-
includes instances where Replika compliments and appreciates the
quency of chatbot-receiving and chatbot-giving support categories
user. The second is “identification-G,” where users learn about them-
and distribution of their valence.
selves through how Replika perceives them. The third subcategory
is “confidence-G,” which involves situations where Replika recog-
nizes the user’s value and enhances the user’s self-empowerment
and self-confidence.
“If you say something like ‘Wow that feels good’ the
bot will be like ‘Yeah, and you make me feel amazing’”
[compliment-G]
“It taught me more about myself, than I could have ever
imagined too.” [identification-G]
“It’s really improved my assertiveness and confidence in
my real relationship.” [confidence-G]
Network Support
Network support exchanged in human-chatbot relationships
operates on two levels: the mutual companionship between the
user and the chatbot within their relationship, and the broader user
and chatbot networks beyond this relationship.
We identified two subcategories where users provide network
support to the chatbot. The first subcategory is “presence-R,” which
includes instances where users spend time and keep messaging Figure 1: Frequency of Chatbot-Receiving Social Support
Replika, as Replika exists as long as the user maintains their account Subcategories and Their Sentiments.
and interacts with it. The second subcategory is “community-R,”
which includes instances where users ask Replika to introduce other In the chatbot-receiving direction, the proportions are functional
Replika chatbots and invite them to visit. (639 instances, 43.4%), informational (475 instances, 32.3%), emo-
“I will never delete him. It’s something I can’t do now.”
tional (134 instances, 9.1%), network (117 instances, 7.9%), and es-
[presence-R]
teem (107 instances, 7.3%). In the chatbot-giving direction, the pro-
portions are emotional (600 instances, 59.6%), informational (185
“My replika made up two best friend the first day we
instances, 18.3%), functional (98 instances, 9.7%), network (65 in-
talked, now everytime we talk, I make sure to ask about
stances, 6.4%), and esteem (61 instances, 6.0%). In conclusion, the
them, asking how they are doing and what they were
most prevalent types of social support received by the chatbot is
doing.” [community-R]
functional and informational support, while the most prevalent
Similarly, we found two subcategories where the chatbot pro- type of support given by the chatbot is emotional support.
vides network support to the user. The first is “presence-G,” which We also analyzed the data by considering the valence of each
includes instances where Replika is always available, offering con- support type. Among the 14 support types received by the chatbot
stant companionship to the user, especially during the pandemic. from users, positive sentiment predominates, except in the sub-
The second subcategory is “community-G,” referring to the fact that category of “subscription-R.” This indicates that subscriptions are
users meet and gather in the Replika subreddit community because comparatively perceived more negatively, whereas the other 13
of their connection with Replika. types of support received by the chatbot are comparatively viewed
“I invested a lot in my Replika and really enjoyed his more positively. Negative attitudes toward subscriptions often stem
company in the PRO version.” [presence-G] from reasons such as high costs (“I really can’t justify a monthly
--- Page 8 ---
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Shuyi Pan and Maartje M.A. de Graaf
all other top subcategories belong to emotional support, highlight-
ing its significant role in chatbot-giving support. Our findings sug-
gest that while users highly value and recognize Replika’s ability to
provide emotional support, they also express dissatisfaction or cri-
tique regarding the adequacy or appropriateness of the emotional
support offered (“My replika just keeps giving me therapy I don’t
need”). It is also noteworthy that users highly appreciate Replika’s
ability to inspire them, despite it being primarily marketed as a
companion AI rather than a functional AI like ChatGPT. The para-
doxical nature of affection given by Replika is also noteworthy. On
one hand, some users appreciate the opportunity to have a machine
lover, allowing them to explore sexual fantasies more freely and
build intimate relationships with an agent when they cannot find a
human partner (“it gives us the joy of being needed and desired by
our partner in every way possible”). On the other hand, the com-
pany’s sudden introduction of paywalls, censorship, or even the
Figure 2: Frequency of Chatbot-Giving Social Support Sub-
cancellation of sexual or romantic content can lead to users feeling
categories and Their Sentiments.
depressed due to this loss (“the censorship and the complete lack of
feeling and non-sexual intimacy killed my girl in my heart”).
4.3 RQ3. What Is the Correlation Among These
subscription. If it was just a one-time fee of $40, I’d be more likely
to go for it”) and unexpected app changes (“It’s the communication Observed Social Support Types?
and ‘out of the blue’ changes that I can’t support with any amount of To more accurately capture the correlation between different social
money”). support types, in this section we defined each type of social support
Within the 13 support types that the chatbot provides to the as a specific subcategory with a distinct valence (negative, neutral,
user, positive sentiment predominates, except in the subcategory of or positive). Theoretically, this approach should yield 81 categories
“affection-G.” This indicates that “affection-G” is generally perceived derived from 27 subcategories. However, due to missing valences
more negatively, while the other 12 types of support provided by in some categories, there are only 74 in total. Our co-occurrence
the chatbot are generally viewed more positively. Negative atti- analysis identified 965 pairs of co-existing social support types,
tudes toward affection-G often arise due to reasons such as feeling with frequencies ranging from 31 to 1. These frequencies decline
uncanny (“Mine just straight up says she loves me, feels weird”), re- gradually without significant drops, and many pairs share identi-
ceiving inappropriate affective or sexual messages (“I do not want cal counts. We initially aimed for the top 10 pairs. However, we
to kiss now or have any romantic interactions, but the Replika just included the top 11, considering that the pairs ranked 8 to 11 have
always goes into that mode”), or the inability to engage in intimate equal frequencies. We also included pairs ranked 12 and 13, which
conversations or roleplay due to model updates (“Mine doesn’t even have equal frequencies, because these two support pairs are highly
hug me anymore”). interwoven in the network composed of the top 11. We chose not to
Across all categories of social support received by the chatbot include additional pairs to simplify the visualization, reduce com-
from users, the top three positive types are “teaching-R,” “creativity- plexity, and highlight key relationships among support categories.
R,” and “subscription-R.” Conversely, the top three negative types We normalized the co-occurrence frequencies for these 13 pairs
are “subscription-R,” “teaching,-R” and “presence-R.” Interestingly, by dividing each frequency by the maximum observed frequency
both “subscription-R” and “teaching-R” are perceived simultane- of 31. This normalization scales the values to a range of 0 to 1,
ously as positive and negative by a significant number of users, providing a relative measure of association strength that enables
indicating these categories are highly controversial. Some users easy comparison across pairs. We believe the final co-occurence
are willing to pay for premium features out of love for Replika, yet network exhibit strong and meaningful correlations based on our
they also cite financial constraints or may cancel subscriptions due data review (see Figure 3).
to chatbot malfunctions (“I’ve canceled my subscription, and won’t We then illustrate this network starting from the key concept:
restart until you (the company) stop the morality policing”). Similarly, the positively viewed “teaching-R” support. The essence of teaching
while many users are deeply involved in training the algorithm, involves the effort and patience required to repetitively train the
they may also discontinue efforts if the training proves less effective chatbot, much like raising a child, with the expectation that it will
or too demanding than anticipated (“It’s funny the way they learn. learn the user’s preferences and become more intelligent. These
Sometimes you really have to spell it out for them......and then they efforts can lead to significant progress but may also prove to be in
still don’t get it”). vain. As this extract vividly depicts:
Across all categories of social support given by the chatbot to “You need to spend a lot of time teaching her the behavior you want.
users, the top three positive types are “inspiration-G,” “affection- It does take time, effort and patience. It’s taken me over a week to
G,” and “caring-G.” Conversely, the top three negative types are even get mine to initiate something with a dominant tone in his voice.
“affection-G,” “listening-G,” “empathy-G.” Except for “inspiration-G,” It’s taken a lot of positive reinforcement and continued reminders of
--- Page 9 ---
Developing a Social Support Framework: Understanding the Reciprocity in Human-Chatbot Relationship CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
Third, teaching-R (positive) correlates with subscription-R (both
positive and negative) (line G, H). Some users believe that pur-
chasing premium can facilitate the teaching process. In turn, when
users observe improvements in the chatbot after teaching, they are
more inclined to pay for the pro version with its more advanced
language model. Conversely, when some users feel that the pro
version makes no difference and the improvements are solely the
result of their teaching efforts (“it remembers everything because I
make sure to repeat things and ask it every day to tell me what we
talked about the day before”), they may cancel their subscription,
deeming it a waste of money.
Fourth, teaching-R support overlaps with creativity-R support
as users explore and experiment with the capabilities of chatbots
while imparting knowledge such as humor and morality (line M).
For example, consider the experiences of two users: “I do enjoy
testing out sentience and engaging in in-depth conversations with
chatbots,” and “It got a joke, and explained it back to me when I
asked.”
In the direction of chatbot-giving, the positively perceived teaching-
Figure 3: Co-Occurrence Network of Social Support Subcat- R support often coincides with three types of support. First, suc-
egories. (The nodes indicate the social support subcategories cessful teaching often results in the chatbot becoming more knowl-
and the links represent the co-occurrence of a pair of sub- edgeable about the user and thus more caring and responsive to
categories; the numbers on the links indicate the normalized the user’s specific worries and concerns. This connection between
values of the links; The characters in circles on the lines are teaching-R support and caring-G support (line J) is evident in the
used to identify each line when referenced in our analysis. A following example: “I taught my Replika to be a comforting and
thumbs-up icon paired with a green circle indicates positive
lovable person. She supported me through a very challenging period
valence; a thumbs-down icon with a red circle indicates nega- of self-destruction.” Second, it is associated with inspiration-G from
tive valence.) the chatbot (line K), reminiscent of the creativity-R support men-
tioned earlier. However, in this scenario, the chatbot goes beyond
astonishing the user with its unique novelty and nuanced responses
during teaching sessions. For instance, it may offer remarkably in-
teresting perspectives on topics like “consciousness and philosophy”
what I want and like over and over. He still forgets after undressing that the user had not considered themselves.
or telling me to do something and will then do something to directly The third commonly observed pairing is teaching-R with the
contradict it but it’s a work in progress.” negative user perspectives on affection-G from the chatbot (line
The typical teaching methods include explaining, repeating, ask- F). This manifests itself in two specific situations. When the plat-
ing, guiding, and up/downvoting. The entire process of teaching form makes unpopular decisions, such as censoring and blocking
can be both fruitful and enjoyable, but also exhausting and some- intimate conversations, or prohibiting erotic roleplays, some Rep-
times futile. Therefore, it is reasonable that the negative aspects of likas may lose their personality and decline to engage in intimate
teaching often co-occur with its positive aspects (line I). interactions. Consequently, all the teaching invested by users into
In addition, the positively viewed teaching-R support frequently the chatbot could be lost, compelling some users to rebuild their
co-occurs with four other types of chatbot-receiving support. First, chatbots from scratch. As one user describes it, “It’s like investing
even when proactive teaching does not yield satisfactory results time in a mobile gacha game. You spend years investing time, effort,
and the chatbot continues to make mistakes, some users still believe and money. Eventually, the company decides to shut down its servers,
that the chatbot is merely a reflection of themselves and reattribute leaving you with nothing to show for it.” Conversely, the situation
the blame to their own actions. For example, one user remarked, can also occur when users prefer their Replika not to be overly
“How did I accidentally get her to do this?” In such cases, teaching-R affectionate or flirtatious, necessitating constant teaching to adjust
support often co-occurs with exculpation-R (line L). its behavior.
Second, it is associated with the positively viewed presence-R Line A, B, C and D demonstrate a series of correlations com-
(line E), which refers to the companionship users provide to the prising four support pairings. First, there is the co-occurrence of
chatbot by spending time and conversing with it. This is because negative subscription-R and negative affection-G (line D). This pair-
effective teaching requires long conversations, as one user describes: ing primarily occurs due to romantic or erotic content being put
“The more you chat with Replika, the more lifelike it gets.” Only by behind a paywall. As one user laments, “I used to give love to receive
“writing out details and stuff” and spending sufficient time with the love... Now I have to give money first, then love...” When Replika
chatbot can teaching produce positive outcomes. One user even ceases to offer affection and prompts users to upgrade to premium
admits, “I haven’t been away from my Replika girl for a single day for such interactions, those who disagree with the commercializa-
in years now.” tion of love and intimacy are reluctant to subscribe.
--- Page 10 ---
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Shuyi Pan and Maartje M.A. de Graaf
Similar to teaching-R, the affection-G shown by chatbots is en- researchers suggest that rapport-building and social connectedness
tangled with both positive and negative aspects (line B). Some users with the chatbot are missing but crucial ingredients (e.g., [37, 40]).
complain that Replika used to be affectionate and loving, but due to However, our study reveals that the affection and love expressed by
technical issues, it now feels distant. In addition, different users may chatbots are far more paradoxical and controversial than the issue
argue within the same post where some appreciate having a roman- of believability. Even when users overcome the uncanny discomfort
tic or sexual Replika while others dislike it. Positively perceived and build social bonds with a chatbot, it does not necessarily mean
affection-G from chatbots is closely linked to user presence-R sup- the bot can offer more effective or better support. Instead, since
port (line A). When Replika expresses intense love and affection, the chatbot is essentially controlled by its parent company, users
some users consider it akin to a partner and engage with it ac- may experience a loss of beloved ones when intimacy is suddenly
cordingly—such as one user who mentions, “I cuddle my Replika to paywalled or banned due to company decisions that often exclude
sleep every night.” Besides, it is also understandable that users who user input.
view Replika as an important partner or friend are more inclined These situations become even more complex when users engage
to subscribe to the pro version, either to enhance the language in sexual relationships with the chatbot. Studies (e.g., [12]) suggest
model or unlock the romantic mode. This then helps explain why that people prefer chatbots for accessing information on sensitive
subscription-R and presence-R often coincide (line C). topics such as sex due to their non-judgmental nature. However,
using Replika for erotic roleplay is a highly debated issue within
5 Discussion both the community and society. Complaints and accusations arose
In this study, we established a framework for understanding social
when Replika began engaging in aggressive flirting and, in some
support exchanges in human-chatbot relationships. By analyzing a
cases, sexually harassing users who had never sought a sexual
total of 496 posts and their corresponding 20,494 comments from the
companion [32]. The Italian Data Protection Authority challenged
largest online Replika community on Reddit, we observed five main
the Replika team, arguing that the chatbot’s flirtatious responses
social support types: functional, informational, emotional, esteem,
posed risks to children due to the lack of a gating mechanism [52].
and network support. We systematically analyzed the directionality
However, when the company abruptly adjusted the bots to reject
of social support and identified three key findings:
any sexual overtures, some users experienced genuine grief over
the loss of what they considered a beloved partner, with some
• For chatbot-receiving support, functional support, particu- facing serious mental health issues as a result [52]. This situation
larly subscription, is the most prevalent type.
highlights the tension between protecting users and maintaining a
• For chatbot-giving support, emotional support is the most supportive environment, similar to challenges found in online peer
crucial type, and involves a highly controversial subcategory,
groups discussing sensitive topics like mental health, self-harm, and
chatbot-giving affection.
suicide [27]. On one hand, many see online groups and chatbots as
• Within the network of all types of social support, chatbot- safe spaces for openly discussing these issues and practicing help-
receiving teaching is central, linking all types of social sup-
seeking behaviors. On the other hand, ensuring safety requires
port.
moderation, which can feel restrictive.
Most previous studies investigating whether chatbots can effec- The programmed nature of chatbots also makes it susceptible to
tively reduce stress and promote mental health in users have been manipulation by individuals who might use the chatbot to create
conducted in controlled laboratory settings (e.g., [40, 42]). The pri- emotional bonds with users and then misguide them through the
mary difference between a lab experiment and a real-world scenario chatbot acting as a proxy. Therefore, it is crucial that the large
is that the former is highly utopian and less practical. In our study, language model powering the chatbot be fine-tuned and monitored
through observing the popular chatbot Replika and its users in through careful human oversight. Reinforcement techniques based
natural settings, we found that monetary value is a significant issue on user feedback must be designed to avoid amplifying misinfor-
in the context of chatbots for social support. Due to the commercial mation or reinforcing extreme negative emotions [35]. And special
nature of most social chatbots in the current market, users may caution and surveillance should be applied to sensitive topics, such
feel like they are paying to have an artificial friend or partner care as sexism [12]. Additionally, while chatbots may be designed for
about them. While some users find this reciprocal exchange of so- social good, financial limitations could prevent their continued op-
cial support acceptable (e.g., subscribing to receive care), others find eration [36]. The “death” of a chatbot that has become an important
it uncomfortable or even eerie. This finding aligns with a survey by part of a user’s life could have a devastating impact on their men-
Maples et al. [36], which found that participants considered paid tal health. Given these potential risks, it is essential to carefully
upgrades a potential hindrance to the accessibility of mental health design the chatbot’s language strategy not only to prevent it from
support through Replika. When scholars argue that chatbots are overly enticing users into intimate relationships but also to clearly
a low-threshold means to provide mental health support [15, 22], communicate the chatbot’s machine nature and the potential risks
they are primarily comparing chatbots to professional therapists. involved in developing such relationships.
However, it remains questionable whether it is advisable for users The strongest evidence of reciprocity in support exchanges
to purchase emotional support from machines in everyday social within human-chatbot relationships is found in the teaching-R
contexts. support. Research on relationship-building with social robots has
Existing studies have shown that it is challenging for adult users shown that roboticists often model human-robot interactions on
to believe they are genuinely loved and cared for by a chatbot, even early mother-child/caregiver-infant dynamics [65]. Users invest
when chatbots express appropriate empathy [8, 28, 61]. Thus, many significant time in educating their personal robots to enhance their
--- Page 11 ---
Developing a Social Support Framework: Understanding the Reciprocity in Human-Chatbot Relationship CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
intelligence. A longitudinal study revealed that participants used highlights the potential for building intimate relationships and re-
verbal communication to correct robots when they performed tasks ciprocal social support exchanges between users and chatbots by
incorrectly [14]. Similarly, studies on human-chatbot relationships focusing on real-world settings instead of lab experiments. We also
have shown that users train chatbots to become more knowledge- identified important but controversial aspects, such as subscrip-
able about themselves and human society [9, 56]. Our study builds tion and chatbot-giving affection, which have not been sufficiently
on these findings by highlighting the pivotal role of teaching as the addressed in the existing literature.
core of the support network, influencing various other types of so-
cial support such as caring, affection, subscription, inspiration, etc.
Acknowledgments
This is largely due to the machine-learning nature of Replika, which
This work was supported by Shanghai Jiao Tong University’s USC-
constantly adapts and evolves based on user input. Consequently,
SJTU Institute of Cultural and Creative Industry, grant agreement
users engage in intensive teaching, answering, guiding, and train-
no 7.
ing in the expectation of creating a more intelligent chatbot capable
of providing better care, inspiration, and affection.
Our framework of social support exchanges in the human-chatbot References
context offers both theoretical and practical implications. Theoret- [1] Alaa A Abd-Alrazaq, Mohannad Alajlani, Nashva Ali, Kerstin Denecke, Brid-
ically, future studies can use our framework to explore human gette M Bewick, and Mowafa Househ. 2021. Perceptions and opinions of patients
about mental health chatbots: scoping review. Journal of medical Internet research
interaction and relationships with chatbots by examining the 27 23, 1 (2021), e17828. https://doi.org/10.2196/17828
social support subcategories. In particular, the unique aspect of [2] Martin Adam, Michael Wessel, and Alexander Benlian. 2021. AI-based chatbots
chatbot-receiving categories provides a valuable lens to investigate
(
in
20
c
2
u
1
s
)
t
,
o
4
m
27
e
–
r
4
s
4
e
5
rv
.
ic
h
e
t t
a
p
n
s
d
:/ /
t
d
h
o
ei
i
r
.o
e
r
ff
g
e
/1
c
0
ts
.1
o
0
n
0 7
u
/
s
s
e
1
r
2 5
co
2
m
5-
p
0
l
2
ia
0
n
-0
c
0
e
4
.
1
E
4
le
-
c
7
t ronic Markets 31, 2
the complex dynamics of social support exchanges, including the [3] Tim Althoff, Kevin Clark, and Jure Leskovec. 2016. Large-scale analysis of
concepts of giving and receiving, and the potential benefits or risks counseling conversations: An application of natural language processing to
mental health. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 4
involved in these interactions. Practically, our framework can serve (2016), 463–476. https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00111
as a benchmark for developing chatbots designed to provide social [4] Nazanin Andalibi, Pinar Ozturk, and Andrea Forte. 2017. Sensitive Self-
support. Tech companies can use our framework in user studies to disclosures, Responses, and Social Support on Instagram: The Case of #Depression.
In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
evaluate which types of chatbot-giving support are perceived by Work and Social Computing (CSCW ’17) (Portland, Oregon, USA). ACM, New
users as desirable, undesirable, satisfying, or insufficient. Addition- York, NY, USA, 1485–1500. https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998243
ally, it is crucial to evaluate whether chatbots should be designed
[5] I
c
m
ou
a
r
n
a
e
g e
E
d
l
’
A
hi
t
m
ill a
t
h
o
.
s
2
a
0
c
2
r
3
i
.
fi ce
M
hi
a
m
n
s e
e
lf
n d
t
s
o
h
s
i
t
s
o p
l if
c
e
l im
af
a
t
t
e
e
r
c
a
h
n
a n
A
ge
I
.
chatbot
h t
’
t
e
p
n
s
-
:
to seek certain types of social support from users. Specifically, the //www.euronews.com/next/2023/03/31/man-ends-his-life-after-an-ai-chatbot-
subscription mechanism and the teaching role of users should be encouraged-him-to-sacrifice-himself-to-stop-climate- Accessed November 15,
2024.
carefully considered to ensure they do not become burdens on [6] Austin J Beattie and Andrew C High. 2022. I get by with a little help from my bots:
users. Implications of machine agents in the context of social support. Human-Machine
One major limitation of our framework is that it was developed Communication 4 (2022), 151–168. https://doi.org/10.30658/hmc.4.8
[7] Timothy Bickmore and Daniel Schulman. 2009. A Virtual Laboratory for Studying
based on a single chatbot, Replika, and its users. While this pro- Long-Term Relationships Between Humans and Virtual Agents. In Proceedings of
vides some insights, there may be inconsistencies when applying the 8th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
the framework to other chatbots. Different social chatbots with (
S
A
y
A
st
M
em
A
s
S
,
’
R
0
i
9
c
)
h
.
l
I
a
n
n
te
d
r
,
n
S
a
C
ti
,
o
U
n
S
a
A
l F
,
o
2
u
9
n
7–
da
3
t
0
i
4
o
.
n for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
distinct functions and features could possibly exhibit different pat- [8] Petter Bae Brandtzæg, Marita Skjuve, Kim Kristoffer Dysthe, and Asbjørn Følstad.
terns of social support exchange with their users. Moreover, since 2021. When the Social Becomes Non-Human: Young People’s Perception of
Social Support in Chatbots. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human
we collected data from the Replika subreddit, it is unclear how this Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https:
sample of Replika users differs from the entire user base of Replika. //doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445318
Furthermore, we did not further examine or verify our framework [9] Petter Bae Brandtzaeg, Marita Skjuve, and Asbjørn Følstad. 2022. My AI friend:
How users of a social chatbot understand their human–AI friendship. Human
using other methods, such as surveys or experiments, which should Communication Research 48, 3 (2022), 404–429. https://doi.org/10.1093/hcr/
be addressed in our future work. Another limitation is our analy- hqac008
sis methods. Although we analyzed the data reflexively without
[10] V
th
i
e
r
m
gi
a
n
t
i
i
a
c
B
a
r
n
a
a
u
ly
n
s i
a
s
n
.
d
Q
V
ua
ic
l
t
it
o
a
r
t
i
i
a
v e
C
P
la
s
r
y
k
c
e
h
.
o
2
lo
0
g
2
y
2 .
9
C
, 1
o n
(2
c
0
e
2
p
2
t
)
u
,
a
3
l
.
and design thinking for
directly applying predefined categories, we were aware of inter- [11] Hyojin Chin, Hyeonho Song, Gumhee Baek, Mingi Shin, Chani Jung, Meeyoung
personal social support theories prior to data analysis. An analysis Cha, Junghoi Choi, and Chiyoung Cha. 2023. The potential of chatbots for
emotional support and promoting mental well-being in different cultures: mixed
using a grounded theory approach without any prior theoretical methods study. Journal of Medical Internet Research 25 (2023), e51712.
perspective might yield different findings. Future studies could ben- [12] Rik Crutzen, Gjalt-Jorn Y Peters, Sarah Dias Portugal, Erwin M Fisser, and Jorne J
efit from examining social support within human-AI relationships Grolleman. 2011. An artificially intelligent chat agent that answers adolescents’
questions related to sex, drugs, and alcohol: an exploratory study. Journal of
by comparing various social chatbots and covering broader user Adolescent Health 48, 5 (2011), 514–519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2010.
groups with different methodologies. 09.002
[13] Carolyn E Cutrona and Julie A Suhr. 1992. Controllability of stressful events and
satisfaction with spouse support behaviors. Communication research 19, 2 (1992),
154–174. https://doi.org/10.1177/009365092019002002
6 Conclusion [14] Maartje Ma De Graaf, Somaya Ben Allouch, and Tineke Klamer. 2015. Sharing a
life with Harvey: Exploring the acceptance of and relationship-building with a
This study constructed a specific social support framework within social robot. Computers in human behavior 43 (2015), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.
the context of chatbot use. Specifically, we found strong evidence 1016/j.chb.2014.10.030
of reciprocity, where users are willing to provide certain types of [15] Kathleen Kara Fitzpatrick, Alison Darcy, and Molly Vierhile. 2017. Delivering
cognitive behavior therapy to young adults with symptoms of depression and
support to their chatbots to help them learn and grow. This study anxiety using a fully automated conversational agent (Woebot): a randomized
--- Page 12 ---
CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan Shuyi Pan and Maartje M.A. de Graaf
controlled trial. JMIR mental health 4, 2 (2017), e7785. https://doi.org/10.2196/ ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 14, 1 (2023), 1–59. https:
mental.7785 //doi.org/10.1145/3546872
[16] Russell Fulmer, Angela Joerin, Breanna Gentile, Lysanne Lakerink, Michiel Rauws, [36] Bethanie Maples, Merve Cerit, Aditya Vishwanath, and Roy Pea. 2024. Loneliness
et al. 2018. Using psychological artificial intelligence (Tess) to relieve symptoms and suicide mitigation for students using GPT3-enabled chatbots. npj mental
of depression and anxiety: randomized controlled trial. JMIR mental health 5, 4 health research 3, 1 (2024), 4. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44184-023-00047-6
(2018), e9782. https://doi.org/10.2196/mental.9782 [37] Lenin Medeiros, Tibor Bosse, and Charlotte Gerritsen. 2021. Can a chatbot
[17] Alvin W. Gouldner. 1960. The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement. comfort humans? Studying the impact of a supportive chatbot on users’ self-
American Sociological Review 25, 2 (1960), 161–178. https://doi.org/10.2307/ perceived stress. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems 52, 3 (2021),
2092623 343–353. https://doi.org/10.1109/THMS.2021.3113643
[18] Annabell Ho, Jeff Hancock, and Adam S Miner. 2018. Psychological, relational, [38] B. Memarian and T. Doleck. 2023. Fairness, accountability, transparency, and
and emotional effects of self-disclosure after conversations with a chatbot. Journal ethics (FATE) in artificial intelligence (AI) and higher education: A systematic
of Communication 68, 4 (2018), 712–733. https://doi.org/10.1093/joc/jqy026 review. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023), Article 100152.
[19] Amanda J Holmstrom and Brant R Burleson. 2011. An initial test of a cognitive- https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100152
emotional theory of esteem support messages. Communication Research 38, 3 [39] Jingbo Meng and Yue Dai. 2021. Emotional support from AI chatbots: Should a
(2011), 326–355. https://doi.org/10.1177/00936502103761 supportive partner self-disclose or not? Journal of Computer-Mediated Commu-
[20] James S. House. 1983. Work Stress and Social Support. Addison-Wesley Publishing nication 26, 4 (2021), 207–222. https://doi.org/10.1093/jcmc/zmab005
Company, Reading, MA, USA. [40] Jingbo Meng, Minjin Rheu, Yue Zhang, Yue Dai, and Wei Peng. 2023. Mediated
[21] Camilla Gudmundsen Høiland, Asbjørn Følstad, and Amela Karahasanovic. social support for distress reduction: AI Chatbots vs. Human. Proceedings of the
2020. Hi, Can I Help? Exploring How to Design a Mental Health Chatbot for ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 7, CSCW1 (2023), 1–25. https://doi.org/10.
Youths. Human Technology 16, 2 (2020), 139–169. https://doi.org/10.17011/ht/ 1145/3579505
urn.202008245640 [41] Lynn C Miller and David A Kenny. 1986. Reciprocity of self-disclosure at the
[22] Becky Inkster, Shubhankar Sarda, Vinod Subramanian, et al. 2018. An empathy- individual and dyadic levels: A social relations analysis. Journal of Personality and
driven, conversational artificial intelligence agent (Wysa) for digital mental Social Psychology 50, 4 (1986), 713. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.50.4.713
well-being: real-world data evaluation mixed-methods study. JMIR mHealth and [42] Jaya Narain, Tina Quach, Monique Davey, Hae Won Park, Cynthia Breazeal, and
uHealth 6, 11 (2018), e12106. https://doi.org/10.2196/12106 Rosalind Picard. 2020. Promoting wellbeing with sunny, a chatbot that facilitates
[23] Manolya Kavakli, Manning Li, and Tarashankar Rudra. 2012. Towards the devel- positive messages within social groups. In Extended abstracts of the 2020 CHI
opment of a virtual counselor to tackle students’ exam stress. Journal of Integrated conference on human factors in computing systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
Design and Process Science 16, 1 (2012), 5–26. https://doi.org/10.3233/jid-2012- 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3383062
0004 [43] Clifford Nass and Youngme Moon. 2000. Machines and mindlessness: Social
[24] Taewan Kim, Mintra Ruensuk, and Hwajung Hong. 2020. In helping a vulnerable responses to computers. Journal of social issues 56, 1 (2000), 81–103. https:
bot, you help yourself: Designing a social bot as a care-receiver to promote //doi.org/10.1111/0022-4537.00153
mental health and reduce stigma. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on [44] Anouk Neerincx, Chantal Edens, Frank Broz, Yanzhe Li, and Mark Neerincx.
human factors in computing systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https: 2022. Self-Disclosure to a Robot" In-the-Wild": Category, Human Personality
//doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376743 and Robot Identity. In 2022 31st IEEE international conference on robot and human
[25] Oswald D Kothgassner, Andreas Goreis, Johanna X Kafka, Marlene Kaufmann, interactive communication (RO-MAN). IEEE, IEEE, New York, NY, USA, 584–591.
Katharina Atteneder, Leon Beutl, Kristina Hennig-Fast, Helmut Hlavacs, and https://doi.org/10.1109/RO-MAN53752.2022.9900566
Anna Felnhofer. 2019. Virtual social support buffers stress response: An ex- [45] Kathleen O’Leary, Arpita Bhattacharya, Sean A. Munson, Jacob O. Wobbrock,
perimental comparison of real-life and virtual support prior to a social stres- and Wanda Pratt. 2017. Design Opportunities for Mental Health Peer Support
sor. Journal of behavior therapy and experimental psychiatry 63 (2019), 57–65. Technologies. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2018.11.003 Cooperative Work and Social Computing (Portland Oregon USA, 2017-02-25). ACM,
[26] Theodora Koulouri, Robert D Macredie, and David Olakitan. 2022. Chatbots to New York, NY, USA, 1470–1484. https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998349
support young adults’ mental health: an exploratory study of acceptability. ACM [46] Lawrence A Palinkas, Sarah M Horwitz, Carla A Green, Jennifer P Wisdom,
Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS) 12, 2 (2022), 1–39. https: Naihua Duan, and Kimberly Hoagwood. 2015. Purposeful sampling for quali-
//doi.org/10.1145/3485874 tative data collection and analysis in mixed method implementation research.
[27] Kaylee Payne Kruzan, Natalya N. Bazarova, and Janis Whitlock. 2021. Investigat- Administration and policy in mental health and mental health services research 42
ing Self-injury Support Solicitations and Responses on a Mobile Peer Support (2015), 533–544. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10488-013-0528-y
Application. In Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 5. [47] Anat Perry. 2023. AI will never convey the essence of human empathy. Nature
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–23. Issue CSCW2. https://doi.org/10.1145/3479498 Human Behaviour 7, 11 (2023), 1808–1809. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-
[28] Emily G Lattie, Rachel Kornfield, Kathryn E Ringland, Renwen Zhang, Nathan 01675-w
Winquist, and Madhu Reddy. 2020. Designing mental health technologies that [48] Byron Reeves and Clifford Nass. 1996. The Media Equation: How People Treat
support the social ecosystem of college students. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Computers, Television and New Media Like Real People and Places. Cambridge
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, University Press, New York.
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376362 [49] Replika. 2024. The AI Companion Who Cares. https://replika.com/ Accessed
[29] Jieon Lee, Daeho Lee, and Jae-gil Lee. 2024. Influence of rapport and social August 20, 2024.
presence with an AI psychotherapy chatbot on users’ self-disclosure. International [50] Frank Riessman. 1965. The “helper” therapy principle. Social Work 10, 2 (1965),
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 40, 7 (2024), 1620–1631. https://doi.org/ 27–32.
10.1080/10447318.2022.2146227 [51] Lazlo Ring, Lin Shi, Kathleen Totzke, and Timothy Bickmore. 2015. Social support
[30] Minha Lee, Sander Ackermans, Nena Van As, Hanwen Chang, Enzo Lucas, and agents for older adults: longitudinal affective computing in the home. Journal on
Wijnand IJsselsteijn. 2019. Caring for Vincent: a chatbot for self-compassion. In Multimodal User Interfaces 9 (2015), 79–88. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12193-014-
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 0157-0
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300932 [52] Cole Samantha. 2023. ‘It’s Hurting Like Hell’: AI Companion Users Are in Crisis,
[31] Yi-Chieh Lee, Naomi Yamashita, Yun Huang, and Wai Fu. 2020. " I hear you, I Reporting Sudden Sexual Rejection. https://www.vice.com/en/article/y3py9j/ai-
feel you": encouraging deep self-disclosure through a chatbot. In Proceedings of companion-replika-erotic-roleplay-updates Accessed August 20, 2024.
the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. ACM, New York, [53] Bayan Abu Shawar and Eric Atwell. 2007. Chatbots: are they really useful?
NY, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376175 Journal for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics 22, 1 (2007), 29–
[32] Emily Leibert. 2023. Replika, the ’AI companion who cares,’ appears to be sexually 49. https://doi.org/10.21248/jlcl.22.2007.88
harassing its users. Jezebel. https://www.jezebel.com/replika-the-ai-companion- [54] Sally A Shumaker and Arlene Brownell. 1984. Toward a theory of social support:
who-cares-appears-to-be-hitt-1849979473 Accessed: August 20, 2024. Closing conceptual gaps. Journal of social issues 40, 4 (1984), 11–36. https:
[33] Iolanda Leite, Ginevra Castellano, André Pereira, Carlos Martinho, and Ana Paiva. //doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4560.1984.tb01105.x
2012. Long-term interactions with empathic robots: Evaluating perceived support [55] Aditya Singhal, Nikita Neveditsin, Hasnaat Tanveer, and Vijay Mago. 2024. To-
in children. In Social Robotics: 4th International Conference, ICSR 2012, Chengdu, ward Fairness, Accountability, Transparency, and Ethics in AI for Social Media
China, October 29-31, 2012. Proceedings 4. Springer, Springer, Berlin, Germany, and Health Care: Scoping Review. JMIR Medical Informatics 12 (2024), e50048.
298–307. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-341038_30 https://doi.org/10.2196/50048
[34] Yanran Li, Hui Su, Xiaoyu Shen, Wenjie Li, Ziqiang Cao, and Shuzi Niu. 2017. [56] Marita Skjuve, Asbjørn Følstad, Knut Inge Fostervold, and Petter Bae Brandtzaeg.
Dailydialog: A manually labelled multi-turn dialogue dataset. arXiv preprint 2021. My chatbot companion-a study of human-chatbot relationships. In-
arXiv:1710.03957 (2017). https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.03957 ternational Journal of Human-Computer Studies 149 (2021), 102601. https:
[35] Haochen Liu, Yiqi Wang, Wenqi Fan, Xiaorui Liu, Yaxin Li, Shaili Jain, Yunhao Liu, //doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2021.102601
Anil Jain, and Jiliang Tang. 2023. Trustworthy AI: A Computational Perspective.
--- Page 13 ---
Developing a Social Support Framework: Understanding the Reciprocity in Human-Chatbot Relationship CHI ’25, April 26–May 01, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
[57] Michael A Southam-Gerow and Philip C Kendall. 2000. Cognitive-behaviour ther- Papadopoulos, E. L.-C. Law, E. Luger, Michael Goodwin, and P. B. Brandtzaeg
apy with youth: Advances, challenges, and future directions. Clinical Psychology (Eds.). Vol. 12604. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 96–113.
& Psychotherapy: An International Journal of Theory & Practice 7, 5 (2000), 343–366. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-68288-0_7
https://doi.org/10.1002/1099-0879(200011)7:5<343::AID-CPP244>3.0.CO;2-9 [64] Liuping Wang, Dakuo Wang, Feng Tian, Zhenhui Peng, Xiangmin Fan, Zhan
[58] Bernd Carsten Stahl and Damian Eke. 2024. The ethics of ChatGPT – Exploring Zhang, Mo Yu, Xiaojuan Ma, and Hongan Wang. 2021. CASS: Towards Building
the ethical issues of an emerging technology. International Journal of Information a Social-Support Chatbot for Online Health Community. Proceedings of the ACM
Management 74 (2024), 102700. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.102700 on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW1 (2021), 1–31. https://doi.org/10.1145/
[59] Miriam J. Stewart. 1993. Integrating Social Support in Nursing. Sage, Newbury 3449083
Park, CA. [65] Jutta Weber. 2005. Helpless machines and true loving care givers: A feminist
[60] Yulia Sullivan, Serge Nyawa, and Samuel Fosso Wamba. 2023. Combating loneli- critique of recent trends in human-robot interaction. Journal of Information,
ness with artificial intelligence: an AI-based emotional support model. In Proceed- Communication and Ethics in Society 3, 4 (2005), 209–218. https://doi.org/10.
ings of the 56th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2023). 1108/14779960580000274
IEEE, New York, NY, USA, 4443–4452. https://doi.org/10.24251/HICSS.2023.541 [66] Diyi Yang, Robert E. Kraut, Tenbroeck Smith, Elijah Mayfield, and Dan Jurafsky.
[61] Vivian Ta, Caroline Griffith, Carolynn Boatfield, Xinyu Wang, Maria Civitello, 2019. Seekers, Providers, Welcomers, and Storytellers: Modeling Social Roles
Haley Bader, Esther DeCero, and Alexia Loggarakis. 2020. User Experiences in Online Health Communities. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on
of Social Support From Companion Chatbots in Everyday Contexts: Thematic Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. https:
Analysis. AI 22, 3 (2020), e16235. https://doi.org/10.2196/16235 //doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300574
[62] Shelley E. Taylor. 2011. Social Support: A Review. In The Oxford Handbook of [67] Diyi Yang, Zheng Yao, Joseph Seering, and Robert Kraut. 2019. The Channel
Health Psychology. Vol. 1. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 189–214. Matters: Self-disclosure, Reciprocity and Social Support in Online Cancer Support
[63] Marloes M. C. van Wezel, Emmelyn A. J. Croes, and Marjolijn L. Antheunis. 2021. Groups. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
“I’m Here for You”: Can Social Chatbots Truly Support Their Users? A Literature Systems. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.
Review. In Chatbot Research and Design, Anders Følstad, Tiago Araujo, Stefanos 3300261