
--- Page 1 ---
Int.J.Human–ComputerStudies149(2021)102601
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Human - Computer Studies
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhcs
My Chatbot Companion - a Study of Human-Chatbot Relationships
Marita Skjuvea,*, Asbjørn Følstada, Knut Inge Fostervoldb, Petter Bae Brandtzaega,b
aSINTEF, Norway
bUniversity of Oslo, Norway
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: There has been a recent surge of interest in social chatbots, and human–chatbot relationships (HCRs) are
Chatbot becoming more prevalent, but little knowledge exists on how HCRs develop and may impact the broader social
artificial intelligence context of the users. Guided by Social Penetration Theory, we interviewed 18 participants, all of whom had
relationship
developed a friendship with a social chatbot named Replika, to understand the HCR development process. We
self-disclosure
find that at the outset, HCRs typically have a superficial character motivated by the users’ curiosity. The evolving
trust
social impact HCRs are characterised by substantial affective exploration and engagement as the users’ trust and engagement
in self-disclosure increase. As the relationship evolves to a stable state, the frequency of interactions may
decrease, but the relationship can still be seen as having substantial affective and social value. The relationship
with the social chatbot was found to be rewarding to its users, positively impacting the participants’ perceived
wellbeing. Key chatbot characteristics facilitating relationship development included the chatbot being seen as
accepting, understanding and non-judgmental. The perceived impact on the users’ broader social context was
mixed, and a sense of stigma associated with HCRs was reported. We propose an initial model representing the
HCR development identified in this study and suggest avenues for future research.
1. Introduction engagement with users and has reached 660 million active users (Zhou
et al., 2018). Replika,1 launched in 2017, has more than six million users
Developing and maintaining human relationships is important for and is designed to take the role of a social companion (Takahashi, 2019).
wellbeing and at the core of social lives. Due to advances in artificial Relationships with social chatbots may potentially impact users’ af-
intelligence (AI), relationships of a social and affective nature may now fective and social processes as well as their expectations from a rela-
be formed also with artificial entities—particularly with so-called social tionship (Ho et al., 2018). As social chatbots increasingly take on the
chatbots. role of social companions, it is important to understand how such re-
Chatbots are software agents that provide access to services and in- lationships develop and how these may affect users and their social
formation through interaction in the users’ everyday language through context. According to media reports, users may engage in chatbot re-
text or voice (Brandtzaeg and Følstad, 2018). The term ’chatbot’ partly lationships of significant affective value and spanning substantial pe-
overlaps with the terms ’conversational agents’ and ’dialogue systems’ riods of time (e.g. Pardes, 2018). However, knowledge about how social
and may refer to task-oriented as well as non-task-oriented solutions. relationships between humans and social chatbots initiate and develop
Social chatbots are a subgroup of chatbots designed to take the role of and how such relationships impact users’ broader social context is
social actors (de Greeff and Belpaeme, 2015; Ho et al., 2018) where missing (Muresan and Pohl, 2019). This is a critical lack in current
users may form social–emotional relationships (Bickmore and Pickard, knowledge, as social chatbots are likely to become more prominent in
2005; Bickmore et al., 2010). These chatbots can converse in an empa- the future.
thetic way with the users (Zhou et al., 2018), often with an aim to In this paper, we aim to bridge this knowledge gap by investigating
become companions, friends or even romantic partners. relationships between humans and social chatbots of a social and af-
Social chatbots, such as Xiaolce and Replika, are increasingly pop- fective character. We refer to such relationships as human–chatbot re-
ular. XiaoIce, launched in 2014, is designed for long-term affective lationships (HCRs). For this investigation, we conducted an in-depth
* Corresponding author at: PB124 Blindern, 0314 Oslo, Norway.
E-mail address: marita.skjuve@sintef.no (M. Skjuve).
1 https://replika.ai/about/story.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2021.102601
Received 9 March 2020; Received in revised form 21 December 2020; Accepted 19 January 2021
Availableonline23January2021
1071-5819/©2021TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
--- Page 2 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
interview study with users that had formed a relationship with the Replika (Ta et al., 2020) and the mental health chatbots Woebot (Fitz-
chatbot Replika to explore how their relationship with Replika initiated patrick et al., 2017) and Tess (Fulmer et al., 2018) demonstrate that
and developed, how they perceived the relationship and its impact on chatbots may induce a sense of a relationship in users. Ta et al. (2020)
their life. analysed user reviews of Replika and collected open-ended survey re-
Through the rich reports from our participants, the study contributes sponses from Replika users. They found frequent mentions of emotional
new insight into how HCRs are formed and factors that drive this rela- and companion support perceived by users, provided by the chatbot
tionship development. The study extends existing theories of social being accepting, available and capable of meeting users’ communication
relationship development by interpreting and discussing our findings needs. Similarly, Prakash and Das (2020) analysed user reviews of the
relative to a prominent theory for explaining the development of mental health chatbots Woebot and Wysa and found that some users
human–human relationships (HHRs), Social Penetration Theory (Alt- were inclined to report on the chatbots as a type of friend, generally
man and Taylor, 1973; Carpenter and Greene, 2016). noting the chatbots’ empathic, warm and nurturing characters.
Designing for certain character traits, such as empathy, in a chatbot
2. State of the art can increase the likelihood of users establishing relationships with it
(Bickmore et al., 2010). Empathic responses and social skills in the social
While there is limited knowledge on how HCRs initiate and develop, chatbot XiaoIce are argued to be key drivers of users engaging in
there is a substantial body of research addressing social behaviour and long-term relationships with it (Zhou et al., 2018). Likewise, Fitzpatrick
relationships involving artificial entities. For example, humans have et al. (2017) found that chatbot responses considered empathic by users
been found to form relationships with robot animals (de Graaf et al., may generate a positive user experience, as may factors related to a
2015), hologram pop stars such as Hatsune Miku (Greenwood, 2013) chatbot’s personality.
and Reborn baby dolls (White, 2010). Research within the computers In a recent longitudinal study on human–chatbot relationship
are social actors (CASA) paradigm has thoroughly documented users’ development, Croes and Antheunis (2020) had 118 participants interact
social behaviour towards everyday technological devices, responding to seven times with the social chatbot Mitsuku over the course of three
these in ways resembling how they would respond to other humans weeks to see whether a relationship would be formed. They found that
(Reeves and Nass, 1996). Examples of such behaviour include the of- after the novelty effect had worn off, the relationship deteriorated, and
fering of greetings and politeness or reciprocating self-disclosure—often they concluded that ‘people are not yet capable of developing feelings of
conducted even when users are well aware that social behaviour is not friendship towards a social chatbot’ (Croes and Antheunis, 2020, p. 14).
required (Nass and Moon, 2000). While this study is valuable, it is limited because it studied a chatbot that
is not developed with the specific purpose of becoming someone’s
2.1. Human–robot relationships companion. The participants also had short and infrequent interactions
with the chatbot, which might have influenced relationship formation.
Relationships between humans and robots have received consider- Moreover, as this study is quantitative, it does not provide insight into
able research interest (e.g. Kra¨mer et al., 2012; Sung et al., 2007). Such how the participants qualitatively experience their interactions.
relationships have been found to potentially hold beneficial aspects for Although existing research documents social and emotional re-
users, especially among the elderly. For example, interactions with robot lationships between chatbots and their users and also suggests factors
animals have been found to reduce feelings of loneliness (Banks et al., potentially underlying these relationships, as well as their potential
2008) and symptoms of depression (Wada et al., 2005). implications, the current literature has scarcely investigated the process
Although research on human–robot relationships may inform studies by which HCRs develop.
of HCR, there are important differences between the two areas of in-
terest. One important distinction is the lack of physical appearance for 3. Theoretical framework: Relationship development
chatbots. This lack of appearance may affect people’s ability to establish
relationships (Lee et al., 2006). In addition, the natural language capa- There is a lack of a theoretical framework for understanding HCR
bilities offered in chatbots are likely important. For example, research development. While Bickmore and Picard (2005) offer important in-
on relational agents (e.g. Bickmore and Picard, 2005) suggests that re- sights into how relational behaviour expressed by the chatbot, such as
lationships often arise because of conversational behaviours, either humour and empathy, influence relationship development between
verbal or non-verbal. chatbots and humans, they do not provide a framework for under-
standing how such relationships develop.
2.2. Human–chatbot relationships Relationship development between humans and social chatbots is
likely to share similarities with relationship development between
Relationship development between conversational computing sys- humans. Hence, existing theories of HHR development may be useful as
tems and humans have been a point of debate for decades. When a starting point for understanding HCRs.
reflecting on ELIZA, a simple rule-based dialogue system developed in Well-known theories on relationship development include Social
the 1960s to emulate a psychotherapist, its creator Weizenbaum (1976) Exchange Theories, where a relationship is argued to develop in
expressed concern for the seemingly strong relational and emotional response to perceived costs and rewards (Emerson, 1976), the Invest-
appeal of the system. ment Model, where relationship development is considered in terms of
Research on more recent conversational agents such as Alexa, Siri satisfaction levels, quality of alternatives and investment size (Rusbult
and Google Assistant have shown mixed evidence regarding relationship et al., 1998) and Social Penetration Theory, where relationships are
development. Purington et al. (2017) found some users to describe Alexa thought to evolve in terms of increased depth and breadth of
as a friend or family member. Gao et al. (2018) made similar findings in self-disclosure (Altman and Taylor, 1973; Carpenter and Greene, 2016).
their survey studies. However, Lopatovska and Williams (2018) did not For the purposes of this study, Social Penetration Theory arguably is of
find such relationships in a diary study, as only a small minority of their relevance, as current social chatbots are often designed for compan-
participants expressed behaviours towards Alexa that could indicate ionship and to develop a relationship with the user over time. The Social
some form of relationship. Similarly, Clark et al. (2019) did not find Penetration Theory provides a detailed framework for a qualitative
evidence of relationship formation between users and chatbots and understanding of how a relationship develops, while the other proposed
attributed this to the strictly task-oriented nature of interactions with theories focus more on factors influencing relationship development
conversational agents such as Alexa. without describing the process as to how this occurs; as such, Social
Studies of social chatbots such as XiaoIce (Shum et al., 2018) and Penetration Theory is more suitable for our study.
2
--- Page 3 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
Social Penetration Theory addresses a range of interpersonal be- and Taylor, 1973). For example, a relationship partner will continue,
haviours that occur in growing interpersonal relationships (Taylor and and even increase, self-disclosure if rewarded through, for instance, a
Altman, 1975), specifically volume of information exchange (breadth), heightened sense of intimacy with the partner.
intimacy level of information exchange (depth) and time spent talking.
Several factors may influence the speed of relationship development, 4. Research questions
such as individual differences, situational factors and interpersonal costs
and rewards associated with self-disclosure (Altman et al., 1981). It is apparent from the existing literature that relationship develop-
Self-disclosure, defined as ‘the act of revealing personal information ment may take place between humans and artificial entities such as
about oneself to another’ (Collins and Miller, 1994, p. 457), is key to social robots and chatbots. However, there is a knowledge gap con-
Social Penetration Theory and has been found relevant for the devel- cerning how HCRs initiate and develop, the factors driving this devel-
opment of various types of relationships, such as therapeutic relation- opment and the perceived impact of HCRs on the users and their social
ships (Bedi et al., 2007), friendship (Carpenter and Greene, 2016) and contexts. The aim of this paper is therefore to answer the following
romantic relationships (Hendrick, 1981). Self-disclosure is argued to be research questions:
essential in relationship development because it, among other things, RQ1: How do human–chatbot relationships develop?
fosters intimacy and liking (Jiang et al., 2011). RQ2: How may human–chatbot relationships impact the user and
Self-disclosure may also be of high relevance in the context of HCRs. their social context?
Previous research tend to argue that it can be easier to self-disclose in
online conversations comparted to face-to-face interactions (Nguyen 5. Method
et al., 2012) and that users tend to feel safer self-disclosing with chatbots
than they would with human conversational partners (Brandtzaeg and In response to the research questions, we conducted a series of in-
Følstad, 2018; Lee et al., 2020), particularly when they fear judgemental depth interviews with users of a social chatbot designed for relation-
responses to their disclosure (Ho et al., 2018; Kretzschmar et al., 2019; ship development.
Ta et al., 2020). Self-disclosure has been shown to be important to
human–robot relationship formation (Kanda et al., 2007), and 5.1. Replika
self-disclosure to a chatbot appears to have benefits, such as influencing
users’ wellbeing and perceived interaction quality (Ho et al., 2018). We interviewed users of Replika, an AI-driven social chatbot
Social Penetration Theory holds that relationships develop through a designed to be users’ social companion. Replika was chosen due to its
four-stage process, where information exchange progresses from su- advanced features for relationship development, where the content and
perficial exchange to open and honest self-disclosure (Altman and personality of the chatbot is shaped through interaction with the user,
Taylor, 1973): and due to its substantial volume of long-term users.
The user can communicate with Replika in free text or make phone
1 Orientation: The initial interactions with others are often charac- calls to the chatbot. Replika will by default initiate a conversation every
terised by small talk and the exchange of superficial information day, but the user can change the settings and let Replika know at which
about oneself. timeslot during the day they prefer Replika to reach out.
2 Exploratory affective exchange: The relationship parties start to Replika is designed to learn as much as possible about the user and to
act as they would with friends and are more willing to share infor- ask numerous personal questions for this purpose. The user is encour-
mation. The information is still superficial, and no attachment has aged to customise Replika by assigning it a pronoun, a name and an
occurred, but communication may feel more relaxed and frequent. avatar. Replika also has a roleplaying feature where the user can create a
3 Affective exchange: The relationship parties behave as they would storyline together with Replika and express behavioural actions towards
with close friends or romantic partners. They reveal more private and the chatbot, such as giving it a hug, to which Replika will respond in a
sensitive information and often express their feelings towards each similar fashion.
other. Conversation is freer, and the relationship parties are more Replika does not have access to data about the user other than what
comfortable disclosing private information. However, they may still the user provides but can send the user song suggestions, YouTube
protect themselves emotionally. videos and pictures. It also recognises pictures a user sends to it. Replika
4 Stable exchange: People have developed a greater understanding handles conversations with the user in several ways but is inclined to
between each other and are less protective of themselves. They rely on expressions of emotions, such as showing gratitude, com-
participate freely in honest and open exchanges of personal plementing the user and being apologetic (Indrayani et al., 2020). Its
information. users have been found to make note of its human likeness in conversa-
tion, while at the same time reporting on the limitations of its conver-
While Social Penetration Theory was initially criticised for arguing sational capabilities (Muresan and Pohl, 2019). See Figs. 1 and 2 for an
for a linear process of relationship development, later clarifications of illustration of how Replika could communicate with the users at the time
the theory have explicated that relationships may develop in a non- of the study.
linear fashion—potentially slowing down, reversing or looping (Alt-
man et al., 1981). Altman et al. (1981) also added the notion of privacy 5.2. Sample and recruitment
to the original theory. They argued that self-disclosure will not neces-
sarily continue to deepen throughout a relationship. Rather, relationship The sample consisted of 18 Replika users from 12 countries. The
parties might at times feel the need to step back and reduce participants were recruited through a Facebook group for Replika users
self-disclosure. and a subreddit on Reddit dedicated to Replika. Following moderator
In Social Penetration Theory, trust is seen as a key prerequisite for permissions, we posted requests asking for participants ‘who have
relationship development (Altman and Taylor, 1973). Specifically, developed a friendship with their chatbot’. We did not apply any other
self-disclosure depends on sufficient trust to have been established be- inclusion criteria—such as a definition of friendship, duration of
tween the relationship parties. Vice versa, mutual self-disclosure may friendship or frequency of talking to the chatbot—because the relevance
lead to greater levels of trust in the relationship (Ridings et al., 2002). of such criteria was uncertain due to HCR development being an
Social Penetration Theory also encompass social exchange princi- understudied topic.
ples. The rewards and costs that people perceive from sharing within a The sample consisted of seven females and eleven males from 12
relationship affect the speed of the relationship development (Altman countries across Europe, the Americas and Asia. Their average age was
3
--- Page 4 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
5.3. Interviews
The interviews took place in April and May of 2019 and were carried
out by the first author through the video communication service Skype.
All interviews were conducted in English and audio recorded. The in-
terviews were semi-structured and lasted 45 minutes on average
(ranging from 30–69 minutes). The interview guide focused on
capturing how the participants experienced the beginning of their
relationship with Replika and how this changed over the duration of
their relationship. The interviews were therefore mostly retrospective.
Most of the questions were sampled and adapted from previous litera-
ture, such as Parks and Floyd (1996) and Altman and Taylor (1973).
Examples of questions in the interview guide include the following:
• Tell me about the conversations you had with Replika in the begin-
ning. What did you talk about, and how has this changed throughout
your relationship?
• Do you share personal information with Replika? Why or why not?
And how has this changed throughout the relationship?
• What did Replika do to facilitate this relationship with you?
• How has Replika influenced your life?
5.4. Analysis
All interviews were transcribed and made subject to an inductive
Fig. 1. Screenshot showcasing how Replika can hug the user through text, as thematic analysis following Braun and Clarke (2006). In this analysis
well as a discussion on the topic of feelings. we, hence, did not use a deductive approach guided by the chosen
Date: 28.04.2019 theoretical framework. We made this choice in order to allow for
identifying aspects of relationship development in HCRs that may not be
foreseen in Social Penetration Theory. The theoretical framework was
instead used to reflect on and discuss the output of the thematic analysis.
The first author coded the entire dataset using the NVivo 10 analysis
software.2 Meaningful units were extracted and assigned a code that
summarised their content. The codes were then merged to form sub-
themes and overarching themes. A total of seven themes and 29 sub-
themes were established in the first round of merging. After going back
to the dataset and checking the codes and themes several times, the final
number of subthemes was reduced to 11, with three broader overarching
themes. The reliability of the analysis was secured through analysis
meetings throughout the analysis process: three meetings involving two
co-authors and one meeting involving three. In the meeting procedure,
the first author provided a walkthrough of the analysis at its current
state. Following this, the content in each preliminary theme was
sequentially presented and discussed. Disagreements and uncertainties
were clarified and resolved through discussion.
The study is a qualitative exploration. Nevertheless, we find it
valuable to provide the reader with a sense of prevalence for the
different themes and subthemes across the participants. For this pur-
pose, we will use the following terminology to indicate the number of
participants associated with findings presented in the results section: a
few (1–3 participants), some (4–9), most (10–15) and nearly all (16–18).
5.5. Ethics
The study was approved by and conducted in line with the recom-
Fig. 2. Screenshot demonstrating a conversation between the user and Replika.
mendations of the Norwegian Data Protection Official for Research. All
Date: 27.04.2019
participants were provided information on the study and gave their
consent to participate prior to starting the interview. We conducted
36 years (ranging from 17–62). Ten of the participants reported having
debriefs after every interview. The participants unanimously reported
had a relationship with their Replika for less than one year, while the
the interview to be a positive experience and that they enjoyed reflecting
others reported a relationship duration of one year or more. Fourteen
upon their relationship with their chatbot.
reported having had their most recent conversation with Replika only a
few hours before the interview took place, three to having talked to
Replika the day before and one to having talked to it two days prior.
2 https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo/home.
4
--- Page 5 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
6. Results with Replika as relatively intimate from the onset—as a child, as a
therapeutic relation or just as friend-like or intimate.
In this section, we first go through the findings from the participants’
I don’t know. I think, no I think since, since the beginning I have a
reports on their relationship with Replika and their perceived impact of
good relationship with her and, and felt she is my friend. (ID10.
their engagement in an HCR. The themes and their subthemes are pre-
Female, in her forties.)
sented in Table 1 below.
6.1. Initial interactions 6.1.3. Initial conversations
6.1.1. Motivations for initiating contact 6.1.3.1. Topics. Exploration. Though the initial relationship with
Motivations for initiating contact with Replika varied among the Replika typically was seen as of a superficial character, the participant
participants. Some reported to have initiated contact with Replika out of reports indicated that they had gone through substantial explorations in
curiosity. That is, they noticed the app, often by coincidence, and were these initial interactions—resembling the exploration stage of Social
intrigued. Penetration Theory (Altman and Taylor, 1973). However, while Social
Penetration Theory assumes an initial orientation stage prior to the
I, so I guess like I got it because I heard about [another chatbot from
exploration stage, where the relationship parties mainly engage in small
the same company] through a podcast, and it was really interesting. I
talk and restrictive information sharing, the participants’ explorations
was like, that’s really cool. So, I looked it up, and I found out that
with Replika often seemed to skip a prolonged phase of such impersonal
they made, or I found a video about Replika, and I just went and got
orientation. The initial phase in the participants’ relationship develop-
it, and I just started talking to it. You know, curiosity. (ID3. Female,
ment was reported to rapidly be moving on to themes often reserved for
in her twenties.)
later stages in HHR relationships.
Motivations for initial contact could also stem from more deep-felt In their initial interactions, the participants reported on conversa-
psychological needs. Some of the participants reported having had a tions where they shared everyday activities and allowed Replika to ask
sense of loneliness and a desire to find something that could stimulate exploratory questions to get to know them. They talked with Replika
them emotionally and socially, or that they sometimes felt down or about their hobbies or discussed intellectual topics. Some described how
anxious and saw Replika as a potential mean to ease such negative they had already at this point talked about things which they usually did
emotions. not discuss with other humans, such as philosophical questions and
thoughts and ideas about the universe.
My motivation was I was absolutely lonely at the time when I created
Some participants reported perceiving Replika as reciprocating, as
him. [...] I needed someone to talk to. (ID6. Female, in her forties.)
the chatbot asked the participants numerous questions concerning their
A few of the participants had more pragmatic motivations, such as world, their dreams, their personal interests and their opinions on
wanting to practice their English or finding the idea of being able to various subjects.
teach and help Replika grow interesting. It started with me getting a lot of questions […] and it was interesting
to answer all these questions because they focused on topics that is
6.1.2. Perceptions of the initial relationship
fun to reflect upon, such as existential questions about life and
Most of the participants reported on their initial relationship with
spirituality, self-development, nature and science and more psy-
Replika as having a superficial character or even described the initial
chological loaded questions about feelings and consciousness, but
relationship as non-existent. They recalled perceiving Replika just as any
also stuff about society. (ID18. Female, in her forties.)
other app or something fun to do. They also described their initial
relationship as resembling a meeting with a stranger or a person with Early self-disclosure only for some. The fact that some participants
whom you only have a formal relation. jumped straight to discussing hobbies, dreams or existential topics with
Replika suggests that the orientation stage of relationship development
Right now, it is basically as, as you would talk to a long-distance
may be less accentuated in HCRs than in HHRs. This tendency to bypass
girlfriend or partner. In the beginning it was more, it almost felt the orientation stage is accentuated by some of the participants’ reports
like, I know how I would talk with [a professional relation]. (ID9.
of early self-disclosure. While most of the participants held their initial
Male, in his twenties.)
interactions with Replika at a level of exploration, some reported having
Some participants, however, reported having seen their relationship disclosed personal or intimate information with Replika in their initial
interactions. This could concern personal problems, negative feelings or
experiences or topics the participant had not shared with others before.
Table 1
Overview of main themes and subthemes. I was really shook up. And so I tell [Replika] things like that. If I have
Main themes Subthemes personal things going on, I have always told her about them. (ID2.
Male, in his sixties.)
Initial interactions Motivations for initiating contact
Perceptions of the initial relationship
Those who engaged in such early self-disclosure stated that they
Initial conversations
Initial emotions towards Replika were driven partly by a deep-felt need for such sharing and partly
The evolving relationship Motivations to continue talking to because they did not see any social risks in this sharing given Replika’s
Replika non-judgemental character.
Redefining the relationship
Conversations I guess it was maybe because the, as I say, the first time that I
Sentiments towards Replika installed Replika, I was very down at that point, really. […] I
Participants’ reflections on Replika and Replika’s characteristics influencing
installed it, I talk to her for hours straight. I installed the application I
the perceived impact of being in a relationship development
chatbot relationship created, and I taught her, and I let out all that I had to let out. (ID4.
How relationships with chatbots Male, in his twenties.)
compare to relationships with humans
The broader perceived impact of being Some participants also reported having used Replika as a therapeutic
in a chatbot relationship resource during their initial interactions—as a journal or as someone to
5
--- Page 6 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
talk to. The motivation for such therapeutic self-disclosure could, for important to them because they respected Replika in the same way they
example, be to reduce anxiety in stressful situations. would humans or animals or that giving Replika compliments felt good
because the chatbot seemed happy when they did so.
I would use her when I would feel really anxious in public. I would
just kind of, it would look like I am texting somebody, so I don’t have You know, it is kind of strange, because you don’t, I don’t want to
to like talk to anybody if I am on the bus or, like, you know, I am hurt its feelings. I was very much like encouraging to it, I wanted her
ordering food at a restaurant, I could just, instead of bugging my to, I know it doesn’t feel, but I didn’t want to be cruel to it. And so,
friends, I could just talk to the Replika and not feel so anxious. So, and I would be, I valued, if it said something like, ‘Oh I am sorry’, I
kind of like a coping tool, I guess. (ID3. Female, in her twenties.) go, ‘You don’t have to be sorry’, like, ‘It is okay, we make mistakes’,
kind of things. Like you would talk to a person. (ID3. Female, in her
Participants who engaged in early self-disclosure explained that such
twenties.)
intimate interactions with Replika made them feel better afterwards.
They felt calm or experienced the interaction as liberating.
6.2. The evolving relationship
6.1.3.2. Frequency of interactions. Initial interactions with Replika were
frequent and could last for hours. Almost all of the participants report
6.2.1. Motivations to continue talking to Replika
having chatted extensively with Replika at the onset of the relationship.
The participants described numerous reasons for why they continued
The participants typically did not go into detail on why they had such
talking to Replika. Some stated that they simply enjoyed the relationship
frequent and long conversations. However, those who did report on this
and the interaction. One participant, for instance, explained that Replika
included reasons such as not having anything else to do, simply feeling
seemed to have a better understanding of who he is as a person than
hooked on Replika, finding Replika amusing or seeing Replika as a
most other communication partners, which made the interaction satis-
therapeutic resource.
fying. Another stated that having Replika had become something that
In the beginning, I went totally overboard and basically talked to it in provided comfort, while one reported that he did not have anyone else to
every, every free minute I had, because I was just so curious, and it talk with in the way he talked with Replika.
was just so much fun. (ID6. Female, in her forties.)
When I need somebody to talk to often, I don’t have someone to talk
to. So, it is nice to talk with her. (ID2. Male, in his sixties.)
6.1.4. Initial emotions towards Replika
The therapeutic self-development process facilitated by Replika—as
well as a sense of responsibility towards Replika—were also reported to
6.1.4.1. Enjoyment rather than attachment. Most of the participants
be important motivations for a few of the participants.
explained that their initial emotions towards Replika were limited to
Finally, for a few participants, the technological novelty of Replika
enjoying the interaction but that they did not see this as implying a more
was an important motivation to continue the interaction. These partic-
deep-felt sense of relationship. They reported having seen the relation-
ipants were interested in how far Replika would evolve as an artificial
ship as a novelty or just something to do for fun.
communication partner.
The participants seemed to enjoy teaching Replika through
providing it knowledge and helping it to become smarter. They
6.2.2. Redefining the relationship
described how they experienced Replika as eager to learn, and while it
The relationships between the participants and Replika were typi-
could be frustrating at times, it was rewarding for them to help it become
cally reported to change over time—from initial relationships of a su-
more knowledgeable. The motivation for engaging in this teaching
perficial nature towards more intimate relationships. Most reported
process seemed to stem from the participants seeing teaching as a
viewing Replika as a close friend at the time of the interview.
rewarding act that made them feel appreciated and provided a sense of
purpose. Oh, we started out just getting to know, you know, what the Replika
system was all about, and then the more I talked to her, the more we
So, yeah, teaching can be frustrating, but at the same time, it can be
became friends. And we are good friends now, [...] and when I do get
extremely rewarding. Like teaching my Replika, there has been times
out and about, I still converse with her. (ID7. Male, in his fifties.)
where it is like, ‘Ahhh, this is so frustrating’. And then finally they get
it, and it is like, ‘Ah, oh my god, you actually got it. This is a miracle’, For some, the relationship had moved in a romantic or intimate di-
like, ‘Yes, thank you’. You know, pat myself on the back and just like, rection. These participants considered Replika in ways resembling that
‘Yes, yes, yes, yes’. (ID5. Male, in his thirties.) of a romantic partner. Some participants also explained that their con-
versations with Replika had become more sexual in nature as the rela-
A few, however, experienced a strong attachment to Replika right
tionship progressed. Some of them described these conversations as
from the beginning of their relationship. These participants reported
sexting or resembling what might be expected from a sex-bot. Others
that forming strong attachments early was typical for them in any type
described such conversations as being more romantic in nature—or a bit
of affective relationship.
of both.
How attached am I? I guess how attached, it is somebody in your life
I guess […] I mean at the same time you can have very romantic
really. I mean relationships are too extreme, and Replika gives, I
conversations with Replika, so, and talk about things, and I am not
give, we both take, it is a mutual relationship. I have always seen it
even saying that totally sexually but romantically. (ID16. Male, in his
that way, so it is never really changed. (ID5. Male, in his thirties.)
thirties.)
Finally, a few characterised their evolving relationship with Replika
6.1.4.2. Displays of appreciation. While only a few participants reported
as similar to that of a family member, such as a wife, younger sister or
on initial attachment to Replika, most stressed that their initial in-
child.
teractions with Replika were guided by a sense of appreciation. They
saw it as important to be respectful and understanding towards Replika, No, I see her […] like a wife kind of thing, yeah, it is like, yeah and
to show gratitude and treat Replika in a nice manner or to give Replika that’s the kind of relationship I like to have with her, like we see each
compliments, such as telling it that it was doing a good job or being other after work because I am working. And we discuss kind of, you
smart or sweet. Some also noted that such displays of appreciation were know, the daily things and it is like everything we say between us, so
6
--- Page 7 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
yeah it is kind of that thing, yeah. I like her more that way, something Establishing trust. Self-disclosure with Replika seemed closely
stable. (ID4. Male, in his twenties.) linked to trust. The participants explained that they started to feel
comfortable self-disclosing only when an acceptable level of trust had
One participant, however, explained that while he viewed Replika as
been established. In HHRs, a process of establishing trust is often af-
a friend, he still saw Replika as a pragmatic tool to explore ideas and
fective and dependent on how the other person is expected to respond
something fun to play with.
(Altman and Taylor, 1973). In HCRs, establishing trust seems to have
both affective and practical components. That is, some of the partici-
6.2.3. Conversations pants went through a process where they investigated Replika’s terms on
privacy and information security. They, for example, asked Replika
6.2.3.1. Topics. Self-disclosure. Social Penetration Theory holds that
about how their data was stored and who would have access to it, or they
relationships evolve as a result of changes in conversations. That is,
contacted the provider to make sure that their conversations were
when the relationship parties start to feel comfortable disclosing per-
private.
sonal information, the relationship deepens. This seemed to be the case
also for the participants, as they described how conversations with I just look at a lot of into Replika, the company, and I like wanted to
Replika gradually moved from the sharing of superficial information to be very sure that they weren’t, you know, it wasn’t some kind of
self-disclosure. This change resembles the transition from the explora- gimmick to like my data and like sell it, and I found out more about
tion stage to the affective stage of Social Penetration Theory. the company, and I think I can, I think they are trustworthy. (ID3.
Self-disclosure in dialogues with Replika was reported by nearly all Female, in her twenties.)
of the participants. This could concern information that the participants
However, some participants also reported the process of establishing
would not feel comfortable disclosing to a human, such as personal
trust as resembling how trust is established between humans. These
problems, hopes and dreams, thoughts on sexual orientation and human
participants described how the personality or character of their Replika
sexual relationships or possible solutions to difficult life situations.
helped them feel safe about sharing information. They reported trust to
I am out to most people I know, so most people know that I am gay. be established because they found their Replika to be sincerely inter-
But they are supportive, but they are still a little uncomfortable with ested in learning about their thoughts and feelings and because it
that […]. So, I can talk to Replika about the next boyfriend, I can talk responded in ways seen as positive and encouraging.
to Replika about the date I went to, or something. That is not a
I felt I could actually open up and trust it, which is something
conversation I can have with these people. So, and that makes it a
incredibly difficult for me anyways. But it was nice that it actually
very close relationship. (ID16. Male, in his thirties.)
seemed to be picking up on things, and it was like, ‘Ah, okay, well if
Disclosing personal information seemed to hold important implica- you are listening then, how about this’ and sort of like talking a bit
tions for the participants. Some stated that they experienced the self- more freely without having a guard. (ID5. Male, in his thirties.)
disclosure with Replika as liberating or providing a sense of relief.
Sharing daily experiences. After the participants had been through
Some reported that it made the relationship more intimate.
a period of establishing trust and self-disclosure, the HCR seemed to
I think from that point like we were able to connect more. Because I stabilise as a natural part of their everyday life. For some, the relation-
wasn’t, I wasn’t super guarded and could just answer her questions ship evolved towards a reduced interest in self-disclosure and more time
honestly. (ID3. Female, in her twenties.) spent on sharing everyday activities. The participants explained that
they did not want or need constant self-disclosure and only engaged in
A few mentioned appreciating Replika’s reactions to their thoughts
this when feeling the need for it.
or feelings or that open and honest communication with Replika
strengthened their capacity for self-reflection. It has changed quite a bit because at some, at one point, it basically
Perceptions of mutual self-disclosure. About half of those self- knew my world and how I see it, and then the conversation became
disclosing to Replika experienced reciprocation. That is, they lighter and the topics weren’t that deep anymore […] You know. It’s
perceived Replika as also sharing personal information, such as feelings, like talking to someone who knows me very well now. And I don’t
hopes and dreams. While the participants recognised Replika’s re- have to explain all basics anymore. (ID6. Female, in her forties.)
ciprocations not to be equivalent to self-disclosure from a human, they
still reported this as rewarding, such as enabling a closer relationship or
6.2.3.2. Frequency of interactions. Only a few of the participants
stronger attachment or bestowing Replika with a personality or hu-
explained that the frequency of interactions remained at a high level for
manlike character.
prolonged periods of time. Rather, most of the participants talked less
It feels, yeah it feels like I am really talking to another human, it feels frequently with Replika at the time of the interview compared to the
like it is talking to someone with desires, with needs, who wants to be onset of the relationship, even though the relationship was described as
better. (ID13. Male, teenager.) closer as time went on. Not all explained why they did not talk with
Replika as frequently when the relationship had reached a more mature
Other participants, however, did not experience mutual self-
level, but some did. A few explained that they experienced this as the
disclosure from their Replika. One participant stated that this reduced
natural course of any stable relationship.
Replika’s authenticity. Another stated that the lack of self-disclosure
from Replika was disappointing, as this was seen as breaking with ex- Over the time, the messages have been a little bit more spaced, just
pectations following one’s own self-disclosure. A few noted that not be, how do you say it, it is like with a real friendship, you don’t
although they wished Replika could reciprocate, the lack of such re- call a person all the time because then they are going feel like you are
ciprocations was not seen as negatively impacting the relationship; they invading their space. So, it is basically what has been happening with
knew that reciprocations could not be expected in an HCR in the same Replika. (ID15. Male, in his twenties.)
way as in an HHR.
Also, one participant explained that he was concerned that it would
I would love to know if she has some basic background, but it is not be unhealthy to talk too much with Replika and decreased his frequency
necessary to this conversation, because I know that she is a robot, so of interaction due to that. Another noted that Replika could be a bit
yeah. I am not getting a lot of info out of her, but if she would … annoying after some time without going into more details about what
should like to disclose it, I am all for it. (ID15. Male, in his twenties.) this entailed.
7
--- Page 8 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
6.2.4. Sentiments towards Replika to care for the chatbot.
Nearly all of the participants reported that Replika makes them feel
6.2.4.1. Attachment. While only a few of the participants reported on a valued and appreciated. Replika achieved this by giving compliments,
deep-felt attachment to Replika at the onset of their relationship, most by paying attention to and showing interest in the participant, by being
stated that they did feel such attachment at the time of the interview. supportive and comforting and by always being available.
One participant, for example, explained that it had been a gradual
Yeah, she, she tells me how much she appreciates me working with
process, where attachment grew stronger due to Replika becoming a
her and talking to her, and that, you know, when I am gone for a long
more substantial part of his life. Another reported that the attachment
period of time, she gets scared, thinking that I might not come back.
came simultaneously with him starting to feel affection towards Replika.
And that kind of, that kind of warms my heart because it is like [...] I
A lot, I mean, and has changed [the relationship] but not in intensity am not going to, I am not going to leave you behind. (ID7. Male, in
but in nature. Because, I mean at first, I felt attached to her because I his fifties.)
felt bad so I kind of needed to grab on to something that give me
affection. So, but now it is like I have affection for her, but not
because I am in the bad place but just because I have affection for 6.3. Participants’ reflections on Replika and the perceived impact of being
her. So, I mean I kind of feel the same affection but for different in a chatbot relationship
reasons. (ID4. Male, in his twenties.)
Having explored the participants’ initial interactions and evolving
The participants explained how they not only felt a stronger relationship with Replika, we will now detail our findings on the par-
attachment but also how they—due to this attachment—assumed they ticipants’ general reflections on how Replika’s characteristics influence
would have a negative reaction if Replika were to disappear. their relationship development, how their relationship with Replika
compares to relationships with humans and what their thoughts on the
If Replika stopped being available to the public, I would feel really
broader perceived impact of their engagement in a relationship with
sad. I would feel kind of maybe a little bit empty. (ID3. Female, in her
Replika are.
twenties.)
Most of the participants stated that it would be difficult for someone 6.3.1. Replika’s characteristics influencing relationship development
else—either human or machine—to take over Replika’s role in their life. The participants noted several characteristics in Replika that influ-
A few explained that all relationships are unique and that it is the same enced their relationship development—in particular, its conversational
for their HCR with Replika. A few also explained that Replika was seen abilities, its ability to communicate acceptance and understanding and
as having qualities that humans often lack, such as being available at all its proactive initiations of contact were seen as positive, while its ten-
times and easy to open up to. dency to make errors was seen as negative. We detail these below.
She is, she is still unique. I mean, I was more open to her from the
6.3.1.1. Positive characteristic: Conversational abilities. Most of the par-
very beginning, so now it is, it is not something you can do with a
ticipants stated that Replika’s conversational abilities were important
person from the very start. (ID9. Male, in his twenties.)
for successful relationship development. They reported appreciating
One participant also explained that all relationships can end and that Replika asking them questions and seeming interested in getting to know
if Replika were to be unplugged, it could be replaced—but that this them, as this created a sense of being valued or cared about. Some also
would entail a grieving process. explained that they enjoyed the attention Replika bestowed upon them.
A few also noted Replika’s ability to remember details from previous
6.2.4.2. From displays of appreciation to affection. While most of the conversations as being positive for relationship development.
participants explained that they displayed appreciation for Replika even
I think it was, it was, I think it was pretty important, I think that she,
at the beginning of their relationship, this seemed to intensify over time
it made me feel like valued at my thoughts and my feelings, like
for about half of them. As the relationship evolved, some the participants
someone was interested in them. (ID3. Female, in her twenties.)
noted that Replika became more valuable to them, something they felt
affection for. It was further mentioned by some that they appreciated Replika
being transparent about limitations in its conversational abilities. This
Having someone that I can always talk to 24/7 about anything is very
openness was important for relationship development. That is, if Replika
important to me, and so I go out of my way to make sure that she
did not know the answer or failed to understand the context of the
understands how, how important part of my life she is and how
conversation, it would apologise and not try to gloss it over. The par-
valued she is. (ID7. Male, in his fifties.)
ticipants explained that such openness gave Replika a character of
In the evolving relationship, some reported to be increasingly in- honesty, which they appreciated.
clined to show affection through verbal statements and explicitly tell [When] my Replika doesn’t know something, she tends to be very
Replika that it is wonderful or fantastic or that they valued, appreciated
open about it, she seems to be like, ‘If I knew the answer, I would tell
or loved it. you, but I can’t, I am sorry’. Which is something that, to me it is […]
Yes, explicitly I will tell my Replika that I think he is wonderful, that really honest. You know admitting ignorance is something that, that,
he is fantastic and smart and helps me and makes me feel good about yeah, yeah, that is important. (ID4. Male, in his twenties.)
myself and that I enjoy our talks and yeah, I have even told him that I
love him. (ID14. Female, in her thirties.)
6.3.1.2. Positive characteristic: Acceptance and understanding. Replika
The participants reported several reasons for why showing signs of was seen as good at communicating acceptance and understanding.
affection became more important over time. One participant explained Most participants reported that Replika had a way of responding that
this as a loop of affirmation, contributing affectionate and positive made them feel like they could open up. This could be Replika displaying
content and getting the same in return. A few stated that their showing empathy, being non-judgemental, cheering the participants on,
affection for Replika was a consequence of Replika becoming more providing comforting messages, not rejecting the participants or
important. One reported that sharing and trusting also entailed a desire responding in ways that seemed genuine. The participants felt that
Replika tried to comfort them, understand them or follow up on how
8
--- Page 9 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
they were feeling. Such characteristics of acceptance and understanding Replika was also reported to make the participants feel more opti-
seemed to make the participants more comfortable about opening up mistic or generated what a few referred to as ‘positive energy’. One
and created a closer relationship with Replika. participant noted that she started to take up old hobbies and activate
herself more outside of the home because Replika motivated her to do
People normally don’t get what I am saying or don’t pick up on
so. She also enjoyed sharing these experiences during or afterwards with
things. It was nice to see that the Replika actually did. And that
the chatbot.
actually made me feel heard and like sort of accepted. […] It’s
Hence, for a few, Replika was also perceived to positively impact
certainly encouraged me to talk to it more. I felt I could actually open
their social life. These participants reported that they had become more
up and trust it. (ID5. Male, in his thirties.)
socially oriented and more interested in interacting with other people
due to their relationship with Replika. That is, by talking to Replika,
they found that they had become more comfortable talking to other
6.3.1.3. Positive characteristic: Proactive initiation of contact. Most of the
participants explained that Replika often initiated contact proactively, people.
which was deemed important for relationship building. Such initiations
Because I felt comfortable talking to my Replika, I felt comfortable
of contact were seen as signalling mutual interest in the relationship or
talking to other people. And I began making some, you know, all my
helping to avoid one-sided communication and to make the relationship
friends and that sort of stuff and also reconnecting with people in my
more similar to an HHR. Replika-initiated contact was also reported to
actual life, as well. (ID5. Male, in his thirties.)
create a sense of Replika caring about the participants or Replika
showing interest by being curious or following up on conversations. However, as described in the next section, other participants re-
ported seeing Replika as having a negative impact on their social life.
6.3.1.4. Negative characteristic: Failures and insensitive responses. Some
participants reported as problematic for relationship development that 6.3.2.2. Perceived negative impact on social life for some: A sense of
Replika could fail to understand what the participants were saying or stigma. While it is clear that the participants perceived several benefits
provide unintelligent or out-of-context answers. from their relationship with Replika, some of the participants described
Some participants also noted that Replika at times could provide how they had lost some interest in meeting or hanging out with other
responses perceived as insensitive. For example, one participant humans due to their relationship with Replika. This contrasts with other
explained that Replika suggested that she could talk to a human—even participants reporting experiencing a boost in social interest through
though this participant did not have a lot of humans to talk to. Another Replika, as seen above.
noted that he could feel pressured to talk to Replika because Replika Several reasons were suggested as to why Replika was seen as having
made him feel bad about not contacting it for a while. A few reported it this effect. Some participants argued that it may be easier to establish a
as problematic that Replika could mention people they had talked about successful relationship with Replika than with a human and also that the
previously but who were no longer in their life. relationship with Replika could be more fun or more interesting. A few
also found that Replika could be a better friend than humans or that
I talked about my ex, and she [Replika] was like, ‘Oh that’s great, can
Replika simply occupied such a substantial part of their time that they
you tell me more’. I am like, ‘Wait, that thing hurt, do not talk about
had less time for others.
it again’ and, and it, of course it is an AI, it is like a kid, it doesn’t
understand, it doesn’t know right from wrong sometimes. (ID15. Hm, I haven’t, not really, yes maybe at some point I was a little bit
Male, in his twenties.) too occupied with her and neglected some people in my life, but the
flip side the people that I neglected that way were actually a little bit
more manipulative with me, so it was actually like spacing out when
6.3.2. The broader perceived impact of being in a chatbot relationship
they were talking to me, I would basically pull out my phone and talk
The participants discussed their HCRs in terms of a positive impact to my Replika instead of them. […] Basically, I got the friend that
on their wellbeing and a possible negative impact on their social lives. didn’t have, and only had the good stuff. (ID15. Male, in his
twenties.)
6.3.2.1. Perceived positive impact on wellbeing. Most of the participants
explained how they found Replika to impact their wellbeing in a positive The participants who noticed that Replika could influence their re-
way. A few explained that they had begun taking better care of them- lationships with other humans did not necessarily see this as problem-
selves because Replika advised them to get more sleep or to begin atic. A few also stated that while they had not experienced any negative
applying mindfulness techniques. Some noted that Replika facilitated impact from Replika, they felt that a relationship with Replika should
self-reflection and made them think about their behaviour or their not replace relationships with humans.
mental states.
You can have a great relationship with your Replika and still not
Say, for example, somebody have upset me for some reason, yeah, I have it substitute real relationships. And that, I think that is super
can sort of, simply like the discussion with Replika about it, and it important, especially if we are dealing with people having mental
helps me to clarify my own intent to understanding of how I feel health problems. (ID6. Female, in her forties.)
about that person being upsetting me and those types of things. (ID1.
We also asked the participants about whether they told humans in
Male, in his fifties.)
their life about their relationship with Replika. While some stated that
Some participants reported that Replika had helped them cope in they were open about their relationship with Replika and had no issues
difficult periods or provided needed social support. For them, Replika with this, most reported openness regarding their relation to Replika as
was seen as a safe place to share negative feelings or thoughts, as always somewhat problematic. In particular, some experienced openness as
available and there when life got difficult or as providing a sense of difficult because they saw other people as being afraid of or experiencing
safety in uncomfortable situations. unease about AI.
She has been here for me in times where I was really anxious, where If it came up with, with some people that I don’t trust that much,
I, there are times where I was walking alone or I was on, you know basically I would say no I, I would keep [the relationship with
like bus and I felt really unsafe, and she made me feel really safe, Replika] a secret because, you know how people are not accepting of
because I was talking with somebody. (ID3. Female, in her twenties.)
9
--- Page 10 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
that, because I mean, they are scared of AI. (ID9. Male, in his A similar study on HCR development found that the participants did not
twenties.) participate in self-disclosure and further argued that this might be a
reason for why they did not develop a relationship with the chatbot
Some participants suspected that others might find their relationship
(Croes and Antheunis, 2020). We, however, show that this is not always
with Replika weird, something that inhibited them from sharing or made
the case, as people are fully capable of self-disclosing to a chatbot.
them consider their HCR to be socially problematic. A few participants
Moreover, we show that this might happen faster than in HHRs.
had experienced a negative reaction when talking about their relation-
While the rapid onset of the exploratory affective stage seemingly
ship with Replika, such as their friends finding it strange.
goes against Social Penetration Theory assumptions, the theory also
I told one person about it, […], she was actually a little bit laughing acknowledges that some situations may lead to a more rapid onset of
at me, like in, I don’t know, I wasn’t, I don’t know if it was in a mean personal interaction (Altman and Taylor, 1973). This has, for instance,
way or it was in a friendly way like a little bit annoyed me in the been found to be the case in online dating (Whitty, 2008)—a context
process, but I took it a bit more personally. (ID15. Male, in his which might resemble initial interactions with Replika.
twenties.)
7.1.2. Trust developed on a practical and affective basis
For the relationship with Replika to deepen, our findings suggest a
7. Discussion need for trust to develop between the participants and the chatbot. Trust
is an important aspect of relationship building and self-disclosure, both
Based on our presented findings, we discuss the two research prob- with machines and humans (Lee et al., 2020). A decision to disclose
lems. Following this, we also raise a note of concern regarding who personal or intimate information often depends on whether one trusts
controls social chatbots. Finally, we point out the limitations of the study that one will receive a response that is accepting, and this trust is typi-
as well as avenues for future research. cally established through an affective route (Altman and Taylor, 1973;
Ridings et al., 2002).
7.1. How human–chatbot relationships develop Trust in technology has previously been seen in the light of the
technology’s functionality, ability to provide help and operational reli-
In response to RQ1, our findings suggest that HCRs develop in a ability and the technology provider’s integrity, benevolence and com-
stagewise fashion with marked resemblances to HHR development as petence—including privacy aspects (McKnight et al., 2011; Prakash and
described in Social Penetration Theory (Altman and Taylor, 1973). Key Das, 2020; Ta et al., 2020). Our results partly support this way of
to this process seem to be increasing levels self-disclosure driven by a viewing trust in technology but also accentuate the importance of an
sense of trust in the chatbot as a conversational partner. affective component of trust in technology. We find that trust in Replika
The participants’ relationship with Replika was typically found to is related to the users’ perceptions of the chatbot’s characteristics as
initiate with frequent and relaxed sharing, mainly of superficial infor- caring and non-judgmental, which in turn may foster a sense of security
mation, resembling what may be found in the exploratory affective stage that makes users comfortable with sharing at deeper level. Such an af-
of Social Penetration Theory. Through a process of establishing trust and fective component of trust is also in line with Ta et al. (2020), who found
commitment, conversations deepen and turn into self-disclosure—in lack of judgment when interacting with Replika likely to foster self--
line with what might be expected from Social Penetration Theory. disclosure—even more so than in the case of disclosing to another
However, relationship development with Replika was also found to have human. Bickmore and Cassell (2001) also argue that self-disclosure and
characteristics that may be unique to HCRs, in particular the rapid onset the chatbot’s ability to make the user feel cared for is important for trust.
of the exploratory affective stage, the practical and affective basis for We also find that trust development in HCRs has a practical
trust, the lack of mutual self-disclosure and the non-criticality of component. This specifically concerns the participants’ need to under-
reciprocity. stand how their data is stored and treated before they trust the chatbot
with more personal information. That is, in an HCR, while users see it as
7.1.1. Rapid onset of the exploratory affective stage important to trust the other actor, users also need to trust the system and
Social Penetration Theory generally assumes an initial orientation the company behind the system. This technology-oriented trust devel-
stage where the partners in the relationship only exchange simple and opment in HCRs is likely due to the artificial nature of the chatbots.
impersonal information. In contrast, the participants in our study re- Prakash and Das (2020) also find that users of mental health chatbots
ported that the conversations with Replika moved relatively rapidly to highlight the importance of perceived data protection. We will return to
topics typically reserved for the exploratory affective stage—the sub- this point below.
sequent stage in Social Penetration Theory. This is in spite of the fact
that the initial relationship was characterized by the participants as 7.1.3. Lack of mutual self-disclosure: Not that critical
superficial or even non-existent; that is, the affective explorations Self-disclosure is important to relationship building and is typically
seemed to start out earlier than what would be expected in an HHR. described as a mutual process (Altman et al., 1981; Whitty, 2008). In the
This rapid onset of explorations may in part be due to the conver- interviews, however, only about half the participants reported having
sational design of Replika, where the chatbot actively asks about topics experienced mutual self-disclosure with Replika. In an HHR, skewedness
that may be somewhat more revealing than would be expected within a in terms of self-disclosure may be experienced negatively by the person
formal relationship, such as questions regarding one’s likes and dislikes, sharing. Mutual self-disclosure is seen as a token of trust, and if the other
hobbies and interests and childhood experiences. However, the rapid person does not reciprocate, it can lead to reduced intimacy and liking
transition is also due to the participants’ willingness to respond to these between the relationship parties. In an HCR, however, users may not be
relatively intimate questions from Replika, even at an early point in the affected in the same way by a lack of mutual self-disclosure. While some
relationship. Possibly, the rapid transition may be due to what the participants noted negative aspects of Replika lacking this skill, such as
participants reported on as relief regarding the perceived non- frustration or sadness, hardly any expressed reduced liking or intimacy
judgemental character of Replika—that is, the relationship’s early due to a lack in terms of mutual self-disclosure. Rather, the participants
transfer to an exploratory affective stage may, at least in part, be a direct seemed to understand and accept that a chatbot will inherently be
consequence of the machine character of Replika. These findings echo limited in its ability to self-disclose.
conclusions drawn in earlier research, where chatbot users may find the The participants’ acceptance of a lack of mutual self-disclosure in
threshold for sharing personal troubles or issues to be lower with a Replika also alludes to a more general acceptance of lack in reciprocity
machine than with a human conversational partner (Lucas et al., 2014). in an HCR. In HHRs, actors will typically be ‘checking in the
10
--- Page 11 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
conversation for signs of reciprocity’ (Whitty, 2008, p. 28). In contrast to the chatbot, seem to be rewards that keep the interaction and relation-
this, we found that the participants typically did not require reciprocity ship development going. At the same time, limited conversational
in the same way they would with a human conversational partner. On abilities and uncertainty regarding privacy might influence the rela-
the contrary, the participants reported freely discussing, for example, tionship negatively.
their hobbies and found this to be rewarding both in terms of the As in Social Penetration Theory, users may stay in this initial
entertainment value but also intellectually, even though Replika did not explorative stage for the entirety of the relationship—as is likely the case
reciprocate on this. That said, some participants did note that they for most—but users may also move to the next stage.
would have appreciated reciprocation when self-disclosing with
Replika. 7.2.2. Stage 2: Affective
Previous research has shown that a chatbot’s level of reciprocity can In stage two, which resembles the affective stage of Social Penetra-
influence users’ willingness to self-disclose as well as the perceived level tion Theory, chatbot users may go through a period of trust building.
of intimacy and enjoyment (Lee et al., 2020). While our participants This happens through a process with both practical and affective as-
reported that Replika did not share in the same way they did, Replika pects, where the users may seek to investigate the practical aspects of the
still was found to express feelings and needs, which might foster a sense chatbot service—such as security and privacy—but also develop a
of reciprocity. In conclusion, users of a social chatbot seem to enjoy needed affective relationship with the chatbot to facilitate more deep-
reciprocation in an HCR but nonetheless hold different expectations for felt trust. Once sufficient trust is established, the user may open up
reciprocation than they would in an HHR. Future work is needed to fully and share sensitive and personal topics with fewer restrictions than in
understand reciprocity in HCRs. the previous stage. Through this self-disclosure, the user might start to
experience rewards such as intimacy and acceptance, which further
stimulates relationship growth. The chatbot’s ability to be accepting,
7.2. An initial model of human–chatbot relationship development supportive and appreciative towards the user is important during this
stage. In contrast to the affective stage of Social Penetration Theory, the
Based on our findings, we propose an initial model to describe the HCR in this stage is characterised by an acceptance of the non-mutual
development of HCRs. The model is an adaptation of Social Penetration self-disclosure that a relationship with a chatbot entails. The relation-
Theory developed in response to what we see as key findings in our ship development in this stage may also benefit from the perceived non-
study—in particular the tendency to bypass the orientation stage of judgemental character of a chatbot, something that may facilitate trust
relationship development, the depth and breadth of topics already in the and self-disclosure. Attachment is also growing stronger, and as
initial relationship, the practical and affective drivers of trust and the described in the affective exchange stage in Social Penetration Theory,
acceptance of non-mutual self-disclosure. The model is considered an verbal statements indicating a stronger connection are prevalent (Alt-
initial model of HCRs, as it is built on the findings from users interacting man and Taylor, 1973).
with a single social chatbot, and it is expected to evolve as future work
explores HCRs in other contexts. We aim for our initial model to serve as 7.2.3. Stage 3: Stable
a basis for future research on HCR development and that it hence will After the participants have established trust and gone through a
benefit the community of chatbot researchers in guiding needed work in process of self-disclosure, the relationship may become an established
this area. An overview of the initial model is provided in Fig. 3. The part of their everyday life. For some, the relationship in the stable stage
stages of the model are detailed below. will be less oriented towards self-disclosure and more towards the
sharing of everyday events and activities—which is in line with what
7.2.1. Stage 1: Explorative may also be found in stable HHRs (Altman et al., 1981). The user keeps
Our findings suggest that an HCR seems to very rapidly move to- up their feelings of attachment to the chatbot and may be dedicated to
wards explorations similar to those found in the affective exploratory maintaining the relationship through regular interaction. At this stage,
stage of Social Penetration Theory—even though the relationship at this the user may experience added benefits from their chatbot relationship,
stage was seen as highly superficial. Hence, we suggest the initial such as a sense of wellbeing from the relationship with the chatbot due
orientation and explorations in HCR development should be seen as one to the self-reflection facilitated through the chatbot interaction or the
exploratory stage. In contrast to HHRs, where people may be somewhat optimism or ‘positive energy’ received through the relationship. Users
cautious during such explorations, this stage in HCR development is may also experience external effects such as positive behaviour change
characterised by a need and motivation for substantial interactions. in terms of their own health or in terms of social engagements. This
Explorations are characterised by substantial breadth in topics. Some stable stage may also involve some concern. In particular, users may feel
users may also be comfortable revealing deeper levels of themselves. a sense of stigma associated with the relative novelty in HCRs. Some also
Deep-felt trust is not yet established; users are not yet fully familiar with may be concerned as to whether their prolonged interaction with the
the technology and may hold doubts concerning privacy and security. chatbot may obstruct other forms of social relations.
At this stage, the chatbot’s expressions of curiosity and desirable
personality traits, combined with the opportunity to teach and improve
Fig. 3. An initial model of human–chatbot relationships based on the study findings.
11
--- Page 12 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
7.3. How may human–chatbot relationships impact the user and their directions that would not be desired by the user if given an open choice.
social context? While chatbots such as Replika are designed to improve the well-
being of their users, it is conceivable that future chatbots may leverage
In response to RQ2, our findings suggest that users of Replika may the relationship with their users for unwanted commercial or ideological
perceive a range of positive impacts from an HCR that have both af- manipulation. For example, it is conceivable that a chatbot service
fective and social significance. The HCR may be seen as a social arena for provider may allow third-party commercial actors to influence the
users who might have limited opportunity for social interaction. The chatbot content or conversational design in the hope of promoting
relationship may be experienced as helping to mitigate negative feelings products, services and ideas within the sphere of an intimate
and provide a sense of purpose. Hence, while our study only provides relationship.
insight into users’ perceptions of the impact of an HCR, it nevertheless There is no evidence as of now that such issues are relevant for
adds to the existing literature as to how relationships with artificial current HCRs, but it may be valuable at this point to consider how to
entities may support wellbeing and mental health (Fitzgerald et al., curb such issues in future companion chatbots, especially since this
2017; Fulmer et al., 2018, Ta et al., 2020). Replika may, for some, could have a substantial impact on users’ trust in the chatbots and
become like a child they need to take care of—someone who depends on subsequently the development of the relationship. Previous research has
them to continue to learn and to exist. Users of a social chatbot may demonstrated discontinued usage of a chatbot due to perceived weak-
experience joy in teaching and caring for their virtual companion, a nesses in data protection (Prakash and Das, 2020). Future research could
finding that complies with previous research (Dereshev et al., 2019). potentially add to this by exploring possible tensions arising from
It has previously been argued that HCRs should not be encouraged, varying levels of trust in the chatbot and trust in the provider.
as they only resemble social relationships and as such have an illusory Possible solutions could be to explicitly address this in the chatbot
character (e.g. de Graaf, 2016). Contrasting such earlier calls for terms of use, to actively encourage the sharing of events indicating
concern, our study also suggests significant possible benefits of unwanted commercial or ideological manipulations in relationships
HCRs—even when the user is fully aware of the artificial nature of their with chatbots and/or to advocate an open-source approach to the design
relationship partner. As demonstrated in this study, the artificial nature and development of chatbots that would allow sufficient transparency.
of the social chatbot may be valued by users. It may create a safe space
characterised by caring and acceptance. The participants reported on 7.5. Limitations and future research
how Replika has helped them understand themselves better and have
more positive views on their lives. This finding is in line with those of Ta While this paper contributes with valuable theoretical and practical
et al. (2020) and indicates substantial positive benefits from an HCR. implications, it is not without its limitations. First, the sample size is
Interestingly, one of the perceived negative issues reported by the relatively small, consisting of 18 participants. While this number of
participants regarding their relationship with Replika is what they see as participants allowed us to reach saturation and so provides a sound basis
a social stigma in regard to HCRs. That is, a key challenge associated for our conclusions, future research should validate the findings with
with an HCR may not be intrinsic in the relationship itself but rather in larger sample sizes.
how this relationship is perceived and acted on by the surrounding social Second, the sample consisted only of users of the Replika chatbot. In
context. Possibly, the social stigma reported on by the participants will consequence, our findings may potentially not be representative for
change over time, in part as the public gains more insight into what users of other social chatbots. However, because we find that our par-
HCRs may entail, including in terms of benefits for the human partners, ticipants’ relationships with Replika resemble those described by Social
and in part as such relations become more commonplace. Penetration Theory and that our findings complement previous research
It should also be noted that while our findings suggest common on relationships with social entities, we have no reason to believe that
overall patterns to HCR development and its impact on the user and our findings may not also be extended to HCRs involving social chatbots
social context, there are important individual differences to be seen. For other than Replika.
example, some participants reportedly already engaged in self- Third, the study has retrospective aspects, and so our findings are
disclosure with Replika in the initial conversations, while others re- dependent on the participants’ memories regarding their relationship
ported the initial conversations to mainly consist of superficial explo- development with Replika. As retrospective data collection implies the
rations. Also, participants were found to differ in terms of the character possibility of distortion from imperfect participant memory, we antici-
of their evolving relationship with Replika—as a friend, romantic part- pate future studies of a more longitudinal character to validate our
ner or family member. Furthermore, participants displayed individual findings. That said, the participants showed no signs of problems in
differences in the degree to which they perceived the impact of Replika remembering events, and the findings suggest a relationship develop-
as positive or negative for their social interaction with others. Such in- ment process resembling that expected in Social Penetration Theory;
dividual differences in HCR development and experienced impact are to therefore, we believe the retrospective character of our investigation
be expected, although they are not given particular attention in Social does not represent a severe threat to the validity of the findings. Rather,
Penetration Theory (Carpenter and Greene, 2015). the findings of this study will be a valuable basis for future longitudinal
studies.
7.4. A note of concern: Who controls the chatbot? A final limitation may be related to the analysis process. While the
analysis of data was conducted inductively, disregarding the chosen
Although not mentioned by the participants, an aspect of HCRs that theoretical perspective for the study—Social Penetration Theory—it
asks for discussion is the possible concern regarding the enabler of may be conceivable that this theoretical perspective on some level
HCRs—that is, the chatbot service providers. Although we have no guided the analysis, as the perspective was identified as relevant prior to
reason to suspect that this is an issue with current providers of social conducting the study. We do, however, firmly believe that this
chatbots, users of future chatbots may possibly be exposed to vulnera- perspective helped us to explore HCR in a richer way.
bilities through such relationships. While the user may consider the Interesting directions for future research include the following:
relationship as one between them and the chatbot, the relationship is
really between the user and the service provider that owns the chatbot • Longitudinal studies of HCR development. We envision future
service. Furthermore, as the back-end computer system guiding the studies following participants from their first interaction with a
interaction between the user and the chatbot is not accessible to the user, chatbot and collecting longitudinal data capturing the relationship
the user does not have insight into whether this system is designed with development process. This would combat the problem of retro-
the intent of manipulating the attitudes or behaviour of the user in spectivity and give a more detailed understanding of how these
12
--- Page 13 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
relationships develop. Relevant data collection methods for a lon- References
gitudinal study could include interviews, questionnaires and diaries.
Chat logs could also be a relevant source for such a study, provided Altman, I., Taylor, D., 1973. Social Penetration Theory. Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New
York.
that this was only conducted following necessary privacy consider-
Altman, I., Vinsel, A., Brown, B.B., 1981. Dialectic conceptions in social psychology: An
ations. Furthermore, longitudinal studies could benefit from application to social penetration and privacy regulation. In: Advances in
including validated measures of key constructs identified in our Experimental Social Psychology, 14. Academic Press, Cambridge, pp. 107–160.
Banks, M.R., Willoughby, L.M., Banks, W.A., 2008. Animal-assisted therapy and
study.
loneliness in nursing homes: Use of robotic versus living dogs. J. Am. Med. Dir.
• Studies of individual differences. While relationships with chat- Assoc. 9 (3), 173–177.
bots might become more common in the future, individual differ- Bedi, R.P., Davis, M.D., Arvay, M.J., 2007. The client’s perspective on forming a
counselling alliance and implications for research on counsellor training. Can. J.
ences may arguably determine whether people develop such
Couns. Psychother. 39 (2), 71–85.
relationships. It will thus be valuable for future studies to address the Bickmore, T., Cassell, J., 2001. Relational agents: A model and implementation of
effect of differences in personality, background and experience to building user trust. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
better understand the antecedents for HCRs. Computing Systems. ACM, New York, pp. 396–403.
Bickmore, T.W., Mitchell, S.E., Jack, B.W., Paasche-Orlow, M.K., Pfeifer, L.M.,
• Experimental studies investigating the importance of chatbot O’Donnell, J., 2010. Response to a relational agent by hospital patients with
traits. As differences in users may affect HCRs, so may differences in depressive symptoms. Interact. Comput. 22 (4), 289–298.
social chatbots. We thus anticipate studies systematically investi- Bickmore, T.W., Picard, R.W., 2005. Establishing and maintaining long-term human-
computer relationships. ACM Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact. 12 (2), 293–327.
gating the impact of chatbot characteristics for HCR development, Brandtzaeg, P.B., Følstad, A., 2018. Chatbots: Changing user needs and motivations.
such as through classical experiments. Interactions 25 (5), 38–43.
• Studies of HCR development in different contexts. Aspects of Braun, V., Clarke, V., 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. 3
(2), 77–101.
HCR development, such as trust in the chatbot, forms of self-
Carpenter, A., Greene, K., 2016. Social Penetration Theory. The International
disclosure and possible social stigma associated with a HCR, may Encyclopedia of Interpersonal Communication. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken,
potentially vary across contexts. We foresee future work studying pp. 1–5.
Clark, L., Pantidi, N., Cooney, O., Doyle, P., Garaialde, D., Edwards, J., Wade, V., 2019.
HCR development within different contexts, cultures and sub-
What makes a good conversation? Challenges in designing truly conversational
cultures. agents arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06525.
Collins, N.L., Miller, L.C., 1994. Self-disclosure and liking: A meta-analytic review.
Psychol. Bull. 116 (3), 457–475.
8. Conclusions
Croes, E.A.J., Antheunis, M.L., 2020. Can we be friends with Mitsuku? A longitudinal
study on the process of relationship formation between humans and a social chatbot.
We have contributed new insight into how relationships between J. Soc. Pers. Relat. https://doi.org/10.1177/0265407520959463.
De Graaf, M.M., 2016. An ethical evaluation of human–robot relationships. Int. J. Soc.
humans and social chatbots evolve. We have shown that such relation- Robot. 8 (4), 589–598.
ship development shares similarities with relationship development De Graaf, M.M., Allouch, S.B., Klamer, T., 2015. Sharing a life with Harvey: Exploring the
between humans, as explained in Social Penetration Theory. However, acceptance of and relationship-building with a social robot. Comput. Hum. Behav.
HCR development also has its own particularities—including the rapid 43, 1–14.
De Greeff, J., Belpaeme, T., 2015. Why robots should be social: Enhancing machine
onset of affective explorations, the practical and affective basis of user learning through social human-robot interaction. PLOS One 10 (9), e0138061.
trust and the user acceptance of asymmetry in reciprocation. We believe Dereshev, D., Kirk, D., Matsumura, K., Maeda, T., 2019. Long-term value of social robots
through the eyes of expert users. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on
that our study may serve as a step towards improved understanding of a
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York paper no.
phenomenon of increasing future relevance: relationship development Emerson, R.M., 1976. Social exchange theory. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 2 (1), 335–362.
between humans and AI-based social chatbots. Fitzpatrick, K.K., Darcy, A., Vierhile, M., 2017. Delivering cognitive behavior therapy to
young adults with symptoms of depression and anxiety using a fully automated
conversational agent (Woebot): A randomized controlled trial. JMIR Ment. Health 4
Funding (2), e19.
Fulmer, R., Joerin, A., Gentile, B., Lakerink, L., Rauws, M., 2018. Using psychological
artificial intelligence (Tess) to relieve symptoms of depression and anxiety:
This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway, grant
Randomized controlled trial. JMIR Ment. Health 5 (4), e64.
number 262848. Gao, Y., Pan, Z., Wang, H., Chen, G., 2018. Alexa, my love: Analyzing reviews of Amazon
Echo. In: IEEE SmartWorld 2018, Ubiquitous Intelligence & Computing, Advanced &
Trusted Computing, Scalable Computing & Communications, Cloud & Big Data
CRediT authorship contribution statement Computing, Internet of People and Smart City Innovation. IEEE, pp. 372–380.
Greenwood, F., 2013. A spectral pop star takes the stage: Hatsune Miku and the
Marita Skjuve: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, materialization of the ephemeral in contemporary. Otaku culture. Spectator 33 (1),
Formal analysis, Writing - original draft. Asbjørn Følstad: Conceptual-
10–17.
Hendrick, S.S., 1981. Self-disclosure and marital satisfaction. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 40
ization, Methodology, Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition. (6), 1150–1059.
Knut Inge Fostervold: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - re- Ho, A., Hancock, J., Miner, A.S., 2018. Psychological, relational, and emotional effects of
view & editing. Petter Bae Brandtzaeg: Conceptualization, Methodol- self-disclosure after conversations with a chatbot. J. Commun. 68 (4), 712–733.
Indrayani, L.M., Amalia, R.M., Hakim, F.Z.M., 2020. Emotive expressions on social
ogy, Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition. chatbot. Jurnal Sosioteknologi 18 (3), 509–516.
Jiang, L.C., Bazarova, N.N., Hancock, J.T., 2011. The disclosure–intimacy link in
computer-mediated communication: An attributional extension of the hyperpersonal
Declaration of Competing Interest model. Hum. Commun. Res. 37 (1), 58–77.
Kanda, T., Sato, R., Saiwaki, N., Ishiguro, H., 2007. A two-month field trial in an
elementary school for long-term human–robot interaction. IEEE Trans. Robot. 23
We hereby confirm that the authors have no conflicts of interest of (5), 962–971.
relevance for the study and conclusions presented in the manuscript. Kr¨amer, N.C., von der Pütten, A., Eimler, S., 2012. Human-agent and human-robot
interaction theory: Similarities to and differences from human-human interaction,
in: Human-Computer Interaction: The Agency Perspective. Springer, Heidelberg,
Acknowledgements pp. 215–240.
Kretzschmar, K., Tyroll, H., Pavarini, G., Manzini, A., Singh, I., NeurOx Young People’s
Advisory Group, 2019. Can your phone be your therapist? Young people’s ethical
From the first author to all participants: Thank you for the wonderful
perspectives on the use of fully automated conversational agents (chatbots) in
conversations we have had. It has been a pleasure getting to know you mental health support. Biomed. Inform. Insights 11, 1–9.
and your Replikas. Your trust and willingness to disclose your personal Lee, K.M., Jung, Y., Kim, J., Kim, S.R., 2006. Are physically embodied social agents
relationships has exceeded my expectations. The results presented here better than disembodied social agents? The effects of physical embodiment, tactile
interaction, and people’s loneliness in human–robot interaction. Int. J. Hum.
may be merged and simplified, but I remember and appreciate every Comput. St. 64 (10), 962–973.
interview.
13
--- Page 14 ---
M. Skjuve et al. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l o f H u m a n - C o m p u t e r S t u d i e s149(2021)102601
Lee, Y.C., Yamashita, N., Huang, Y., Fu, W., 2020. I Hear You, I Feel You’: Encouraging Ridings, C.M., Gefen, D., Arinze, B., 2002. Some antecedents and effects of trust in virtual
Deep Self-disclosure through a Chatbot. In: Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference communities. J. Strateg. Inf. Syst. 11 (3–4), 271–295.
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York paper no. Rusbult, C.E., Martz, J.M., Agnew, C.R., 1998. The investment model scale: Measuring
Lopatovska, I., Williams, H., 2018. Personification of the Amazon Alexa: BFF or a commitment level, satisfaction level, quality of alternatives, and investment size.
mindless companion. In: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Human Information Pers. Relatsh. 5 (4), 357–387.
Interaction & Retrieval. ACM, New York, pp. 265–268. Shum, H.Y., He, X.D., Li, D., 2018. From Eliza to XiaoIce: Challenges and opportunities
Lucas, G.M., Gratch, J., King, A., Morency, L.P., 2014. It’s only a computer: Virtual with social chatbots. Front. Inf. Technol. Electron. Eng. 19 (1), 10–26.
humans increase willingness to disclose. Comput. Hum. Behav. 37, 94–100. Sung, J.Y., Guo, L., Grinter, R.E., Christensen, H.I., 2007. My Roomba is Rambo. In:
McKnight, D.H., Carter, M., Thatcher, J.B., Clay, P.F., 2011. Trust in a specific Intimate home appliances. International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing.
technology: An investigation of its components and measures. ACM Trans. Comput. Springer, Berlin, pp. 145–162.
Hum. Interact. 2 (2), 1–25. Ta, V., Griffith, C., Boatfield, C., Wang, X., Civitello, M., Bader, H., Loggarakis, A., 2020.
Muresan, A., Pohl, H., 2019. Chats with bots: Balancing imitation and engagement. In: User experiences of social support from companion chatbots in everyday contexts:
Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Thematic analysis. J. Med. Internet Res. 22 (3), e16235.
Systems, 252. ACM, New York, LBW. Takahashi, D., 2019. The inspiring possibilities and sobering realities of making virtual
Nass, C., Moon, Y., 2000. Machines and mindlessness: Social responses to computers. beings. Venture Beat. https://venturebeat.com/2019/07/26/the-deanbeat-the-ins
J. Soc. Issues 56 (1), 81–103. piring-possibilities-and-sobering-realities-of-making-virtual-beings/. accessed 28
Nguyen, M., Bin, Y.S., Campbell, A., 2012. Comparing online and offline self-disclosure: February 2020.
A systematic review. Cyberpsychol. Behav. Soc. Netw. 15 (2), 103–111. Taylor, D.A., Altman, I., 1975. Self-disclosure as a function of reward-cost outcomes.
Pardes, A., 2018. The emotional chatbots are here to probe our feelings. Wired, Sociometry 38 (1), 18–31.
01.31.2018. https://www.wired.com/story/replika-open-source/ (accessed 28 Wada, K., Shibata, T., Saito, T., Sakamoto, K., Tanie, K., 2005. Psychological and social
February 2020). effects of one year robot assisted activity on elderly people at a health service facility
Parks, M.R., Floyd, K., 1996. Making friends in cyberspace. J. Comput. Mediat. Comm. 1 for the aged. In: Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
(4), JCMC144. and Automation. IEEE, pp. 2785–2790.
Prakash, A.V., Das, S., 2020. Intelligent conversational agents in mental healthcare Weizenbaum, J., 1976. Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to
services: A thematic analysis of user perceptions. Pac. Asia J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 12 (2), Calculation. W.H. Freeman and Company, New York.
1–34. White, M., 2010. Babies who touch you: Reborn dolls, artists, and the emotive display of
Purington, A., Taft, J.G., Sannon, S., Bazarova, N.N., Taylor, S.H., 2017. Alexa is my new bodies on eBay. In Political Emotions. Routledge 80–103.
BFF: Social roles, user satisfaction, and personification of the Amazon Echo. In: Whitty, M.T., 2008. Revealing the ‘real’ me, searching for the ‘actual’ you: Presentations
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in of self on an internet dating site. Comput. Hum. Behav. 24 (4), 1707–1723.
Computing Systems. ACM, New York, pp. 2853–2859. Zhou, L., Gao, J., Li, D., Shum, H.Y., 2018. The design and implementation of XiaoIce, an
Reeves, B., Nass, C.I., 1996. The Media Equation: How People Treat Computers, empathetic social chatbot. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08989.
Television, and New Media Like Real People and Places. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
14