
--- Page 1 ---
Master’s Programme in ICT Innovation
Designing and Evaluating a T angible
T abletop Game for Playful Exploration of the
Energy Grid
Sarah Sommerschuh
Master’s Thesis
2025
--- Page 2 ---
© 2025
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
“Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Interna-
tional” license.

--- Page 3 ---
Author Sarah Sommerschuh
Title Designing and Evaluating a Tangible Tabletop Game for Playful Exploration of
the Energy Grid
Degree programme ICT Innovation
Major Human Computer Interaction and Design
Supervisor Prof. Marko Nieminen
Advisor Sven Deinum (MSc)
Collaborative partner 100%FAT B.V.
Date 28 July 2025 Number of pages 91+99 Language English
Abstract
This thesis presents the design and evaluation of a tangible tabletop game that
encourages museum visitors to playfully explore the energy grid. With the tabletop
introducing a large number of tokens, the focus is on providing an intuitive, engaging
and educational experience. Following a Design Thinking approach, empirical data
was gathered through stakeholder interviews, Co-Design sessions, and a usability
study using a Wizard of Oz prototype with 20 tokens. This study involved five
participantsandcombinedobservation,interviews,questionnaires(SUSandUES-SF),
and pre/post-test quizzes to assess usability, engagement, and learning. The design
achieved a moderate usability score (SUS score of 67) with higher engagement (UES-
SFmeanscoreof4.0/5),thoughfocusedattentionandperceivedusabilityscoredlower.
Learningeffectswerevisibleinuserswithlesspriorknowledge, whileoverall, interest
in the topic remained mainly unchanged. Contrary to prior findings, participants of
the usability study were not overwhelmed by the amount of tokens. Instead, confusion
caused by a lack of support from the digital interface contributed to reduced usability.
Improvedtutorialisation andlearnabilitycouldincrease focusedattention andlearning
outcomes. This thesis makes a contribution to the development of Tangible User
Interfaces by offering insights into managing a large number of tokens in a playful
and educational museum setting, while future research could investigate the role of
collaboration and strategies for reducing interaction time.
Keywords Human-Computer Interaction, Tangible User Interfaces, Physical Tokens,
Design Thinking, Co-Design, Wizard of Oz Prototyping, Usability
Evaluation, Museum Interaction Design
--- Page 4 ---
Preface
I want to thank my supervisor Professor Marko Nieminen from Aalto University and
my critical observer dr.ir. R.W. van Delden from University of Twente for providing
me guidance throughout the thesis process. I especially want to thank Lieven Maes
and my advisor Sven Deinum from 100%FAT for the opportunity to work on this
project, as well as all other colleagues from 100%FAT, participants of the studies, and
friends who contributed and supported me along the way.
Enschede, 28 July 2025
Sarah Sommerschuh
4
--- Page 5 ---
Contents
Abstract 3
Preface 4
Contents 5
Abbreviations 8
1 Introduction 9
1.1 Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.2 Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
1.3 Research Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2 Theoretical Framework 12
2.1 Design Thinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2 Co-Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3 Tangible Tabletops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4 Usability, Engagement, and Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.5 Game Qualities and Drivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.6 Energy Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3 Research Context 21
3.1 Case Company 100%FAT B.V. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2 Project Scope and Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4 Research Methodology 23
4.1 Information Systems Research Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2 Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3 Stakeholder Interviews with Co-Design Activity . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3.1 Semi-Structured Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3.2 Bodystorming and Rough Prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3.3 Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3.4 Analysis Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4 Competitive Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5 Empathising with the User 29
5.1 Key Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.1.1 Actors Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.1.2 Interviewed Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.2 Stakeholder Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2.1 Challenges with Multiple Tokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2.2 Expectations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
--- Page 6 ---
6 Analysis of Empathising and Context of Use 35
6.1 Target Group Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2 Design Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.2.1 Design Considerations for Setup, Simulation and Tokens . . 37
6.2.2 Designing for Usability, Engagement, and Learning . . . . . 39
6.2.3 Prototyping Methods for Tangible Interactions . . . . . . . 42
6.3 Measuring Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3.1 Measuring Usability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3.2 Measuring Engagement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.3.3 Measuring Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.4 Competitive Analysis Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.4.1 Content Feature Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.4.2 Interaction Feature Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
7 Defining Target Group and Requirements 49
7.1 Personas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.1.1 Primary Persona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.1.2 Negative Persona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.2 MoSCoW Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8 Ideating Design Solutions 55
8.1 Ideation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
8.1.1 Bodystorming & Rough Prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
8.1.2 Morphological Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
8.1.3 Storyboarding & MoSCoW Requirements Matching . . . . 58
8.2 Final Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
9 Prototyping and Testing Tangible Interactions 64
9.1 Low-Fidelity Prototyping: Paper & Sketching . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
9.2 High-Fidelity Prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
9.2.1 UI Design and Interaction for Tabletop and Second Screen . 66
9.2.2 3D Printing for Tokens and Placeholders . . . . . . . . . . . 67
9.2.3 Final Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
9.3 Usability Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
9.3.1 Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
9.3.2 Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
9.3.3 Analysis Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
9.3.4 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
9.3.5 Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
10 Discussion 77
10.1 Key Findings and Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
10.2 Limitations and Learnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
10.3 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
6
--- Page 7 ---
11 Conclusion 81
References 82
AI Disclaimer 92
A Octalysis Framework 93
B Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline 94
C Participant Information Sheet Interview and Co-Designing 102
D Consent Form Interview and Co-Designing 105
E Competitor Overview 107
F Storyboards 108
G Storyboards Requirements Fulfilment 117
H Low-Fi Prototyping: Sketches 119
I High-Fi Prototyping: Colour Coding 149
J High-Fi Prototyping: 3D Printed Models 150
K High-Fi Prototyping: Full Interaction 151
L Participant Information Sheet Usability Study 176
M Consent Form Usability Study 179
N System Usability Scale 181
O User Engagement Scale - Short Form 182
P Guideline Usability Study 183
Q Questionnaire Results 188
R 1D Data: Elbow Heights 189
7
--- Page 8 ---
Abbreviations
100%FAT 100%FAT B.V.
CTA Call To Action
HCI Human-Computer Interaction
High-Fi High-Fidelity
IS Information Systems
Low-Fi Low-Fidelity
SUS System Usability Scale
TUI Tangible User Interface
UES-SF User Engagement Scale - Short Form
USP Unique Selling Point
WoZ Wizard of Oz
8
--- Page 9 ---
1 Introduction
Tangible tabletop settings offer users the possibility to interact with a table-sized
digital interface through physical objects(Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares,
2024). In both research and industry, these settings typically involve a limited number
of physical objects with which users can interact (Hansen & Halskov, 2014; Lebrun,
Adam, Mandiau, & Kolski, 2014; DVSI, n.d.). However, the Dutch art and installation
company 100%FAT B.V. (100% FAT)(100FAT B.V., 2023) aims to change this by
incorporating a large amount of such objects, with the goal of enhancing the user
experience andoffering this type ofinstallation to theirclients. This couldgivethem a
Unique Selling Point (USP) compared to their competitors and enable their clients to
offer their users a unique, playful experience with this interactive installation.
In order to find out how interaction design needs to change or adapt when a large
number of these physical objects are available to the user, this thesis will explore and
design such a setup.
This introductory chapter covers the background and motivation for the thesis, the
general objective of the research, and the identified main research problem with its
three sub-questions.
1.1 Background and Motivation
In recent years, tangible interactions have received a great deal of research attention
in the field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)(Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, &
Tavares, 2024).
The term ‘tangible interactions’ has been conceptualised by the Tangible Media
Group,ledbyProf. HiroshiIshii (DaCosta,Zen,DeOliveira,&Tavares,2024),whose
vision includes bringing digital information and computation to life in a dynamic
physical form(Massachusets Institute of Technology, n.d.). As ‘tangible’ refers to
something that can be touched and felt(Oxford University Press, n.d.), the Tangible
Media Group describes Tangible User Interfaces (TUIs) as an iceberg, where part of
the digital world rises above the water’s surface into the physical world, which allows
to interact with it directly (Figure 1) (Massachusets Institute of Technology, n.d.).
Lately, tangible tabletops have emerged as the most commonly used device type in
tangibleinteractiondevelopmentandresearch (DaCosta,Zen,DeOliveira,&Tavares,
2024). Tangible tabletops combine a digital, table-sized screen with physical, tangible
objects called tokens. Users can interact with these physical tokens to influence
the digital display and vice versa.(Hansen & Halskov, 2014; Lebrun et al., 2014;
Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024)
However, multiple challenges around designing and building tangible tabletops
have been identified, such as multiple possible behaviours and actions of the tokens,
and a lack of guidelines for the interaction design(Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, &
Tavares, 2024). The general interaction between the table, the tokens and the user has
also several aspects that influence it. Therefore, aspects such as bimanual and cross
interaction or the degrees of freedom must be taken into account(Da Costa, Zen, &
Tavares, 2024). Some design considerations for tangible tabletops include promoting
--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1: TUI as Iceberg based on Massachusets Institute of Technology (n.d.).
verbal and gestural communication between users and providing visual and tactile
feedback as a result of an interaction(Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024).
Common tangible tabletops used in spaces such as music festivals(Hansen &
Halskov, 2014) or in industrial use cases like traffic simulations(Lebrun et al., 2014)
onlyprovideasmallnumberofphysicalobjectstointeractwithduetotheirrecognition
system. Other systems that allow for a large amount of tokens being recognised have
their recognition system patented(Interactive scape GmbH, n.d.) and product videos
using such tables, as shown on the website of DVSI (n.d.), still show a limited usage
of tokens.
This gap presents a promising opportunity for the selected project to delve
into a largely unexplored area of tangible interaction design with great potential.
100%FAT(100FAT B.V., 2023), an art and technology company based in Enschede,
the Netherlands, therefore identified the business need of being able to offer a tangible
tabletoptoclientsthatallowsandsupportsinteractionwithalargenumberoftokens. By
offering such an installation that also promotes the large amount of tokens, 100%FAT
hopes to provide a USP to their clients and raise interest in renting this product.
In order to achieve this, 100%FAT has to determine what is feasible from a
technological point of view and how such an interaction should be explored and
designed. The first challenge is being tackled by Stijn Teekens, another Master’s
student at 100%FAT(Teekens, in press). For the second challenge, the company
wants to focus on the importance of making the interaction with the large number
of tokens usable, engaging and educational. The setting proposed by the company
to be visualised by the tangible tabletop is an energy grid simulation placed in a
museum. Sinceanenergygridcomposesofvariousaspectssuchasmultipleindividual
generators and transmission lines, a large amount of tokens is favoured to understand
the underlying concepts.
Thus, the scope ofthis researchis to focus on the interaction between table, tokens
and users when a large number of tokens are available, in order to understand how
such a tangible tabletop setup can best be developed.
10
--- Page 11 ---
1.2 Objective
Themain objectiveofthisthesis istounderstandhowtodesign andcreate an effective
interaction process between the tabletop, the tokens and the user when at least 20
tokens are available, with a focus on stimulating usability, engagement and learning.
Toputtheworkintoareal-lifescenario,theusecasesetby100%FATisanenergygrid
simulation game that can be displayed as a tangible tabletop installation in a museum.
The main outcome should provide insights of possible design recommendations
that should get taken into account when aiming to include a large number of tokens in
a tangible tabletop setup. This will ensure that once 100%FAT is ready to develop
such installations with at least 20 tokens, they can design them based on the research
findings to create usable, engaging and educational experiences.
1.3 Research Problem
Based on the case company’s industrial needs and the general objectives, the main
Research Problem to be addressed and discussed is:
How can the interaction with a large number of physical tokens as part of a
tangible tabletop be effectively designed to optimise usability, engagement and
learning throughout an interactive energy simulation?
A large number of physical tokens is hereby specified by the industry partner by at
least20physicalobjects,whichisalsoreasonedinthecontextofthetopic. Theenergy
grid is a rather complex system consisting of multiple entities working intertwined.
Therefore, a large amount of tokens supports representing this concept ideally.
To answer this main research problem, three sub-questions have been identified:
1. How can the interaction of a tangible tabletop with a large number of tokens be
modelled? (Addressed in 5.2, 6.2.1, 7.2, and 8.2)
2. Howcantheprototypebedesignedandimplementedtoeffectivelytestusability,
engagement, and learning? (Addressed in 6.2.2, 6.2.3, 9.1, and 9.2)
3. How can the addressed variables be measured and evaluated when interacting
withalargenumberoftokensonatangibletabletop? (Addressedin6.3and9.3)
11
--- Page 12 ---
2 Theoretical Framework
ThefollowingprovidestheoreticalfoundationsoftheframeworksofDesignThinking,
andCo-Design,andalsoexplainstheconceptsoftangibletabletops,thethreevariables
usability, engagement and learning, game qualities and drivers, and the basics of the
energy grid.
Applying design methodologies such as Design Thinking and Co-Design in the
contextoftangibletabletopsisimportantasitguaranteesaniterativedevelopment. As
analysed by Da Costa, Zen, and Tavares (2024), 43 out of 53 research articles did not
use any specific framework when building interactive or tangible tabletops, showing
the lack of a guided process in this area of research and design. Of the 10 remaining
articles, 5 applied User-Centered Design, 3 Research-through-Design combined with
Co-Design, 1 Co-Design and 1 Design Thinking.
2.1 Design Thinking
Designthinkingisanideologythatisalsorepresentedinadesignframework (Gibbons,
2024). The ideology is based on the idea that hands-on problem solving with a user-
centered approach can lead to innovation, which in turn can lead to competitive
advantage.
The approach is defined by the Design Thinking framework, which is a non-linear
and iterative process that is best suited to deal with unclear or unknown problems
(Interaction Design Foundation, 2025b). This makes it a suitable framework for
tackling the unknown problem of interacting with a large number of tokens.
Depending on the definition, the framework consists of five to six stages. These
are (1) empathising with the user and context of use, (2) defining the target group
and requirements, (3) ideating design solutions, (4) prototyping design solutions,
(5) testing the prototypes, and can include (6) implementing the solution(Gibbons,
2024; InteractionDesignFoundation,2025b). Avisualisationofthefive-stageprocess
excluding the implementation can be seen in Figure 2.
Basedonthesestages, theprocesshelpstounderstanduserneeds, designsolutions
that actually address these needs, and stay creative while iterating through multiple
cycles.
Since this thesis examines how an interaction between a large number of tokens,
the user, and the tabletop can be designed, and implementation of this suggestion is
not part of the scope, this research will follow the five stages of Design Thinking as
seen in Figure 2.
2.2 Co-Design
Co-Design is an instance of co-creation. This approach includes ideating designs,
creativeproblemsolving, anddecisionmakingwithparticipatoryengagement. Hence,
it is characterised as a collaborative approach involving stakeholders in the design
process. (Sanders & Stappers, 2008; Interaction Design Foundation, 2024a)
12
--- Page 13 ---
Figure 2: Design Thinking Process based on Dam and Siang (2025).
Throughthisactiveinvolvementofstakeholdersinthedesignprocess,theycanhelp
shape the development of a product and improve both functionality and performance
of it. This is due to the fact that the position of expert is given to the people who will
be served by the design process. To do so, it is important to identify key stakeholders
first. (Asaad, Baïna, & Ghogho, 2024)
AsafoundationforCo-Design,itisneededtobelieveandunderstandthateveryone,
not just experienced designers and researchers, is creative. With this mindset, it is
possible to design for people’s goals and needs, while making use of collective
creativity from all involved participants throughout the design process. By providing
tools for ideation and expression, the researcher can support this creativity and design
approach. (Sanders & Stappers, 2008)
Experience prototyping, a method introduced by Buchenau and Suri (2000), can
be seen as an embodied design approach. While not originally framed as a Co-Design
activity, it might also be used for Co-Design as shown by the way it encourages active
stakeholder engagement with representations of future interactions. Embodied design
methods focus on the body, senses and personal experiences of the stakeholders to
understand how they experience a design. The methods can be used at different points
in the design process, from building awareness and understanding of a problem to
evaluating a design. (Segura, Vega-Cebrián, Morillo, Velasco, & Bellucci, 2024)
Experience prototyping in specific refers to any form of representation created to
help understand, explore, or communicate what engaging with a designed product,
space, or system might be like. This approach, among others, can be particularly
useful for generating and evaluating design ideas. In this context, acting techniques
such as role-playing, bodystorming, and improvisation can provide deeper insights on
how stakeholders interact with such representations. (Buchenau & Suri, 2000)
To go into detail, bodystorming is a brainstorming method that takes place in a
physical setting, where ideas are expressed both verbally and through movement, and
canalsoemergespontaneouslythroughtheinteractionwithprovidedprops (Buchenau
13
--- Page 14 ---
& Suri, 2000). In this way, it is possible to understand how people interact physically
and socially with technology in simulations by role-playing situations(Jacob, Damen,
& Lallemand, 2023). As this method can also be used in the pre-ideation phase, it can
provide experiential insights and allow gaps and opportunities to be identified(Jacob
et al., 2023).
In general, in fields such as information systems, designing or evaluating artifacts
through workshops that use co-creation approaches is already recognised as an
important area of study (Raftopoulos, 2024).
2.3 Tangible Tabletops
The term tangible tabletop consists of ‘tangible‘, which describes something that can
betouchedandfelt (OxfordUniversityPress,n.d.),and‘tabletop’,whichinthiscaseis
the interactive space of the surface(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024). This interactive
space distinguishes this type of table arrangement from a normal table setup, which
could be argued to always be a tangible tabletop.
Duetothesecomponents,thistypeofinterfacefallsunderTangibleUserInterfaces
(TUIs) (Lebrun et al., 2014). In general, a user interface is defined as the point where
computers and humans interact and communicate(Hashemi-Pour & Churchville,
2024). In TUIs, physical objects, so-called tokens, provide this interface and serve as
both inputand output devices. The usercan touch, manipulate, and shape these tokens
during the interaction process. This makes TUI a post-WIMP approach that blurs the
line between software and hardware, which presents designers with new challenges.
These challenges will be addressed at the end of this section. (Lebrun et al., 2014)
Putdifferently,tangibletabletopsusethephysicaltokensasaninterfacecomponent
specifically on top of a table(Hansen & Halskov, 2014), meaning the term ‘tangible
tabletop’describesthemanipulationofthesephysicalobjectsonamulti-touchsurface
(Shaer, 2009). Both tokens and the table can have the data output in the form of
feedback from the computer system displayed or projected onto(Lebrun et al., 2014).
Hence, while an interactive tabletop uses touch or multi-touch through hand or pen-
based interactions, tangible tabletops use (additionally) these tangible interactions on
a table surface (Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024).
The main advantages of tangible tabletops are (1) a natural interaction, (2) a
social or shared interaction, (3) the physicality of the tokens, and (4) a deeper use of
the senses during the interaction(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa, Zen,
De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024). This makes this type of interface highly suitable for
collaborative applications(Lebrun et al., 2014). A sketched tangible tabletop setting
can be seen in Figure 3.
A framework for specifying tangible interfaces is the ‘Tokens and Constraints’
framework. This states thatphysicalobjects can behave eitheras tokens orconstraints.
(Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
Constraints limit the behaviour of tokens. The physical properties of a constraint
can guide the user in understanding how to manipulate a token and interpret it rules.
Inthecaseoftangibletabletops, thephysicalareathatlimitswheretokenscaninteract
with each other is the tabletop.
14
--- Page 15 ---
Figure 3: Sketch of a Tangible Tabletop Setting.
Tokens, as described before, are physical objects that can be manipulated and are
the main basis for interaction. With these tokens, the user can access or manipulate
digital information. Tokens can be differentiated into active and passive tokens.
While active tokens can generate feedback on the tabletop and on themselves, passive
tokens have fiducials attached which are only interpreted when released onto the
table. Fiducials, or fiducial markers, are used in computer vision to provide real-world
information when captured (ScienceDirect, n.d.).
A variety of technologies are available to capture the tokens on the tangible
tabletop, including webcams, capacitive, fibre optic, rear Diffused Illumination, Radio
Frequency Identification (RFID) or passive magnetic technologies(Kubicki et al.,
2012; Huang, Iravantchi, Chen, & Sample, 2024). Most, such as reacTIVision, which
is a framework for tangible tabletops to detect fiducial markers and finger tracking
(Kaltenbrunner&Bencina,n.d.),usecomputervisiontechnologieswithpassivetokens
(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024).
Kubicki et al. (2012), on the other hand, propose a system with RFID where
the software architecture includes four layers: (1) The hardware in form of the
table, (2) the middleware, which detects objects, handles events and communicates
modifications, (3) the Multi-Agent System, which can manage both smart objects
and context-awareness to provide reasoning capacities, and (4) the HCI layer, which
communicates with users and enables the transfer of virtual information(Kubicki et
al., 2012). Since this thesis focuses on the interaction between tokens, table and user,
based on these proposed layers, the focus is on the latter HCI layer and the capture
technologies will not be further focused as the other Master’s thesis student covers
this in their work.
Based on Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, and Tavares (2024), current challenges in
the development and implementation of TUIs lie in multiple aspects. One of them
is that the links between the virtual and the physical are difficult to manage. Also,
multiplebehavioursandactionsofandwiththetokensarepossible. Thisisbecausethe
token itself does not necessarily define its behaviour, and the tokens, the space and the
relationship between them can change both the behaviour of use and the actions that
15
--- Page 16 ---
can be performed with them. The possibility of continuous and distributed interaction
is another challenge, as tokens can be manipulated all the time. This becomes more
complex with multiple objects and multiple users, making this challenge particularly
interesting in the context of this research. In addition, the lack of standard input or
output devices makes it difficult to develop a working system, along with the lack of
probability and interchangeability, as a tangible tabletop is often not portable and set
up in specific locations.
As the use case for this thesis places the tangible tabletop in a local museum,
the location and setting is also very specific. Imagining Figure 3 in a museum, the
museum visitors around the table can be provided with a motivational framework
for interacting with the table and its underlying energy simulation by designing it
as a game, which allows them to collaborate and enjoy the interaction as part of an
exhibition. By placing a game in the museum, it is also "a way to introduce visitors to
information about what they are viewing" (Schell, 2020).
2.4 Usability, Engagement, and Learning
Due to the museum setting in which this tangible tabletop game is located, three
distinct aspects are valuable to discover.
Oneofthegoalsfromamuseum’spointofviewistoeducatevisitorsontheenergy
grid, so the learning variable needs to be considered. To enable players to interact
with the setup, the variable of usability must be considered, as lengthy introductions
and careful reading of the rules are not feasible in the museum context due to time
constraints. Furthermore, if visitors are to stay for a while and continue to interact
with the installation, engaging elements are also required, which highlights the need
for the variable of engagement.
In order to understand these variables, this section provides definitions and
explanations for all three variables. Possibilities on how to measure them will be
looked at in the analysing of the empathising stage (6.3).
It is important to understand that all three variables are intertwined, as usability
influences engagement and engagement influences learning, and vice versa(O’Brien
& Toms, 2010; Brett et al., 2021; Kejstová et al., 2023).
Usability
Based on DIN EN ISO 9241-11, usability is described by "[t]he extent to which a
product can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals, with effectiveness,
efficiencyandsatisfactioninaspecifiedcontextofuse” (TheInternationalOrganization
for Standardization (ISO), 2018).
Thecontextofuseisinfluencedbytheuserinteractingwiththeproductorservice,
the task that wants to be done, the tools that are available, and the surroundings while
using theproductorservice. Before starting theinteraction, the userhasspecificgoals
inmindwhattheywanttoachievewiththeproduct. Theresultoftheactualinteraction
is then measurable through its effectiveness, efficiency, and provided satisfaction.
This shows how well the product helped the user achieve their initial goals. This
16
--- Page 17 ---
way, usability links the user’s goals with how well the product works for the user.
(Dörflinger, 2019)
Effectiveness addresses if and how accurately users manage to complete their
goals, while efficiency targets the amount of resources needed to reach the goals.
Satisfaction on the other hand refers to the user’s thoughts about their attitude, how
comfortable they feel, how relevant they find the application, and their acceptability of
using the product or service. (Shukairy, 2024)
Nielsen’s definition of usability includes next to the aspects of efficiency and
satisfaction also learnability, memorability and errors (Nielsen, 2024b).
Learnability is especially an important aspect in the context of this topic due to
the novelty of the interaction medium since it describes "[h]ow easy is it for users
to accomplish basic tasks the first time they encounter the design"(Nielsen, 2024b).
Memorability on the other hand refers to how easily users remember how to use the
design after coming back to it after some time has passed, while errors describe the
amount and severity of the errors the user make and how easily it is to recover from
them (Nielsen, 2024b).
Engagement
Generally speaking, user engagement is about the actions users choose to take while
interacting with a product or service to achieve their goals. Therefore, Singh et al.
(2023), and also closely to this Perski, Blandford, West, and Michie (2017), state that
engagement is constructed by behavioural, cognitive, and affective engagement while
interacting with a product or service. They describe that behavioural engagement
relates to the user’s bodily movements or expressions that visualise their participation
during the interaction. Such movements can be for example the head pose, eye gaze,
and facial expressions. Cognitive engagement is outlined as the extent to which users
are ready and able to engage in their tasks, while affective engagement addresses the
feelings of a user in a specific situation, such as joy or pride.
On the other hand, it can be stated that due to these chosen actions to reach a goal,
engagement focuses on the quality of the experience, which in return will make an
experience engaging(Lalmas, O’Brien, & Yom-Tov, 2014). This agrees with O’Brien
andToms(2010),statingthat"engagementisbothprocessandproductofinteraction",
even though over the course of the interaction, the intensity of the engagement may
change.
Different research suggests different attributes of engagement. For example, both
O’BrienandToms(2010)andLalmasetal.(2014)suggestfocusedattention,(positive)
affect,aesthetics(appeal),novelty,(richnessand)control,and(usercontext,incentives,
benefits,and)motivationtomakeupengagement. However,O’BrienandToms(2010)
also lists challenge, feedback, interest, and perceived time, while Lalmas et al. (2014)
focuses on endurability, as well as reputation, trust, and expectation.
Overall,itcanbestatedthatengagementisamultidimensionalconstruct,onwhich
perceived usability has an influence(O’Brien & Toms, 2010). Especially in a learning
game setting, it is important to be addressed, as some users might stop interacting
with such a game if it is not engaging (Brett et al., 2021).
17
--- Page 18 ---
Learning
The Cambridge Dictionary defines learning as "the activity of obtaining knowledge"
andas"knowledgeorpieceofinformationobtainedbystudyorexperience" (Cambridge
University Press, 2025).
Learning through play or games is a recognised approach, in which the genres of
informal learning(Fowler, 2016), educational games(Dicheva & Hodge, 2018; Vieira
& Santos, 2024), and serious games(Souropetsis & Kyza, 2025) can be listed. In
general, there is a growing trend to combine learning or education with entertainment
as so-called edutainment (Souropetsis & Kyza, 2025).
Informal learning is defined as any activity that helps understanding, gaining
knowledge or improving a skill that is not part of a normal school curriculum or
coursesprovidedbyeducationalorsocialorganisations. Itinvolveshands-oninteraction
andpersonalengagementwithanexperience. Thistypeoflearningisbasedonmaking
mistakes and self-discovery. One downside of informal learning is that no learning
may take place. However, even if this is the case, the very act of observing has the
potential to facilitate learning, which weakens this risk. (Fowler, 2016)
Similarly, educational games as part of serious games are based on the principle
that students learn better when they are engaged in an active learning activity by
exploring, experimenting or predicting(Dicheva & Hodge, 2018). These games can
alsohelpgaincriticalskillssuchasanalyticalthinkingandproblem-solvingandfollow
the main aim to educate in addition to offering entertainment(Dicheva & Hodge,
2018; Souropetsis & Kyza, 2025).
Serious games in general have a serious purpose by integrating a real-life system
into a game in which way learners can understand the real world in simplified ways.
Theyareoftendesignedassimulations,whereplayerscanseewhathappensasaresult
of their choices in a safe game setting (Speelman, Escano, Marcos, & Becu, 2023).
As mentioned at the end of the section explaining engagement (2.4), an engaged
userismorelikelytokeepplayingagame (Brettetal.,2021). Thisincreasestheuser’s
chances oflearning andalso demonstrates thatan engagedlearnerwillgetmore outof
a learning experience than one who is disengaged(Fowler, 2013). Similarly, playful
learning also supports engagement (Kejstová et al., 2023).
2.5 Game Qualities and Drivers
There are many different kind of games such as board games, card games or video
games. To define what all games have in common, no matter the actual medium,
Schell (2020) defines ten key qualities that are important to games: "Games must be
entered willfully, have goals, conflict, and rules, can be won and lost, are interactive,
have challenge, can create their own internal value, engage players and are closed,
formal systems" (Schell, 2020).
To design specifically for gamification and behavioural design, the designer Chou
presents the Octalysis framework(Chou, 2025). This framework aims at "optimizing
human motivation and engagement within a system"(Chou, 2025) and consists of
eight main categories or drivers: (1) Epic Meaning and Calling, (2) Development and
18
--- Page 19 ---
Accomplishment, (3) Empowerment of Creativity and Feedback, (4) Ownership and
Possession, (5) Social Influence and Relatedness, (6) Scarcity and Impatience, (7)
Unpredictability and Curiosity, and (8) Loss and Avoidance (Appendix A).
(1) Epic Meaning and Calling addresses when a player feels their actions have
a bigger purpose, which is often shown by helping others or getting lucky early in
the game. (2) Development and Accomplishment is about wanting to improve and
overcome challenges. Rewards only matter when they are earned, and this is the
easiest motivation to design for, which is why most points and badges are based on it.
(3) Empowerment of Creativity and Feedback is achieved when players enjoy being
creative and trying new things, and receiving feedback, which maintains their interest
without the need for constant new content. (4) Ownership and Possession is about
the desire to own something, whether that be money, specific items in games or the
ability to customise ones profile, for example. (5) Social Influence and Relatedness is
the motivation that comes from social aspects such as friends, competition or shared
memories. It pushes players to improve or connect with others. (6) Scarcity and
Impatience occurs when people desire something that is not immediately available,
such as time-based rewards, which intensifies their focus on it. (7) Unpredictability
andCuriosityisaboutwantingtoknowwhathappens next. Thiskeepsplayerscurious
and engaged, but it can also lead to negative side effects, such as gambling. Finally,
(8) Loss and Avoidance is about avoiding negative outcomes, such as losing progress
or missing an opportunity, which can make people act quickly. (Chou, 2025)
Allthesedriverscanbereachedthroughdifferentgameplayelements. Forexample,
(3) Empowerment of Creativity and Feedback can be achieved through milestone
unlocks or boosters, while group quests or mentorship address (5) Social Influence
and Relatedness.
White hat drivers, which are the three on the top of the framework as seen in
Appendix A, "let you express your creativity, make you feel successful through skill
mastery, and give you a higher sense of meaning"(Chou, 2025), which is why "it
makes users feel very good and powerful"(Chou, 2025). Right Brain Core Drives
being the three on the right side of the framework as seen in Appendix A address
intrinsicmotivationby"mak[ing]somethinginitselffunandrewarding" (Chou,2025).
For the specific game setting of a tangible tabletop running a game on the energy
grid, the expectations are thatallgame qualities mentionedbySchell (2020) shouldbe
considered while suitable drivers could be part of the white hat and right brain core
drivers: (2) Development and Accomplishment to motivate players to keep learning
through rewards, (3) Empowerment of Creativity and Feedback to support exploration
of the installation, (5) Social Influence and Relatedness for collaboration during the
interaction, and (7) Unpredictability and Curiosity to increase engagement(Chou,
2025).
2.6 Energy Grid
Finally, in order to understand the basics of the intended simulation, this section gives
an overview of the energy grid and describes which of them are of importance for the
tangible tabletop game.
19
--- Page 20 ---
The energy grid, also called power distribution grid, is a complex system that
transmits and distributes generated power to end users, often over long distances
(Union of Concerned Scientists, 2015; Brain & Roos, 2023).
The grid’s challenge is that it cannot store large amounts of energy, which results
in the fact that electricity has to be generated at the same time it is being consumed.
Simultaneously, it has to react to shifting demands quickly. (Brain & Roos, 2023)
Therearefourmajorcomponentsoftheenergygrid (UnionofConcernedScientists,
2015):
1. Individual Generators:These are divided into fossil energy sources such
as coal- and natural gas-burning power plants or nuclear power plants, and
renewable energy sources such as hydroelectric dams, wind turbines or solar
panels (METGroep, 2020).
2. Transmission lines:With the help of transformers, the electricity coming from
the generators gets converted to higher voltages. This high-voltage electricity is
then carried over long distances by overhead power lines or underground power
cables, which are the transmission lines.
3. Distribution: Where the transmission lines end, another step-down transformer
converts the electricity back to lower voltages(Enbridge Inc., n.d.). The
distribution wires deliver the electricity to end consumers.
4. Load:The load equals the consumer use, which varies immensely depending
on factors such as hour, day and season. Electricity rush hours have their peaks
at 8am to 10pm, where the demand is at its highest (Berkhauer, 2024).
This system is also evolving as it is now possible to connect home-generated
electricity to the grid, for example through solar panels on a homeowner’s roof
(Berkhauer, 2024).
In terms of the tangible tabletop game, the aim is to communicate the different
types of generators that exist and explain why an energy mix, also known as a power
generation mix, consisting of a combination of fossil and renewable generators is still
needed due to the instability and dependencies of renewables. Therefore, these two
concepts are the most important aspects the game should capture.
20
--- Page 21 ---
3 Research Context
In the following chapter, the context of the research is introduced with its involved
case company 100%FAT, the scope and goals of the project from the company’s point
of view with the influence of the museum context in mind.
3.1 Case Company 100%FAT B.V.
Figure 4: Logo of 100%FAT B.V.
100%FAT(Figure4)isaninteractiveinstallationscompanybasedinEnschede,the
Netherlands(100FATB.V.,2023). Itwassetupin2009by,amongothers,currentCEO
Lieven Maes and employs eight people from a variety of backgrounds. Their projects
cover installations combining art and technology in creative ways. The installations
they build can be rented by clients either in a standard or customised form. 100%FAT
can customise the projects in terms of visuals, gameplay and interaction.
The products they offer are, for instance, the (1) FAT Scope, which are AR / VR
binoculars for seeing 3D animations in the real world, the (2) FAT Table, a tangible
and interactive table recognising up to seven physical objects, the (3) FAT Touchless,
a screen that can be controlled with motion controls, and the (4) FAT Player, a media
player that can control the client’s hardware and can make it interactive.
In addition to that, they work with a broad range of (creative) technologies such as
3D printing, robotics and AI.
3.2 Project Scope and Goals
100%FAThastheoverallgoalofunderstandingwhetheratangibletabletopinteraction
with a large number of tokens is feasible and, if yes, how this interaction would have
to be designed.
The technical feasibility of the project is addressed by Stijn Teeken’s thesis work
(Teekens, in press). Therefore, the scope of this thesis is to focus on the interaction
between tokens, table and user and to understand how such an interaction should be
designed to result in a usable, engaging and educating experience.
Due to the museum setting, the main goal regarding usability is that users clearly
understand that they can use the available tokens to manipulate the simulation and
21
--- Page 22 ---
also when to use them, as they are a crucial part of the game. To do so, users should
be able to place and manipulate tokens with minimal effort, understand when to use
touch and when to use the tokens, and how to play the game without external help
needed, since the museum should not have to offer constant human support.
In terms of the desired level of engagement, the most important outcome is that
users enjoy interacting with the installation in terms of having fun by, for instance,
offering a playful, intuitive, and rewarding interaction that encourages exploration as
addressedintheOctalysisframework(2.5). Theyshouldalsobewillingtorecommend
the experience to others, which can help to generate positive reviews of the museum.
The learning objective is for users to getting motivated to learn more about the
energy grid but also to understand what kind of energy suppliers or generators are
available and that an energy mix from different suppliers is needed to successfully
meet the needs of a city or residential area, since the main goal of a museum is to
educate.
By applying the Design Thinking and Co-Design framework, the aim is to build
a testable prototype with multiple tokens with which the desired levels of usability,
engagement, and learning in an energy grid simulation can be measured. Based on the
findings, insights and learnings can then inform how future designs involving multiple
tokens can implement an effective interaction.
22
--- Page 23 ---
4 Research Methodology
TheresearchmethodologyexplainsHevner’sinformationsystemsresearchframework,
includesaliteraturereview,stakeholderinterviewscombinedwithaCo-Designactivity,
and a market analysis to gather insights about the specific context of use.
4.1 Information Systems Research Framework
Figure 5: Information System Research Framework (Hevner et al., 2004).
Alan Hevner’s Information Systems (IS) Research Framework (Figure 5) states
thatforcontributingknowledgethroughinformationsystemsresearch, thebehavioural
science and design science paradigms need to be addressed (Hevner et al., 2004).
While the behavioural-science paradigm has the goal of "inform[ing] researchers
and practitioners of the interactions among people, technology, and organizations
that must be managed if an information system is to achieve its stated purpose", the
design-science paradigm with its focus on problem-solving looks at designing useful
artifacts (Hevner et al., 2004).
For behavioural-science, an IT artifact helps to understand the intended use of
the artifact, how useful it seems, and what impact it has on its users. Design science
builds and evaluates these artifacts with the aim of solving organisational, wicked
problems. (Hevner et al., 2004)
As seen on the left side in Figure 5, the IS Research Framework involves the
research environment, which consists of its people, organisations and technology. All
theseaspectstogetherdescribetheproblemspace,whichhighlightsthebusinessneeds
ensuring the relevance of the research. (Hevner et al., 2004)
23
--- Page 24 ---
Toconductinformationscienceresearch,theorieshavetobedeveloped(behaviour-
science)andartifactsbuild(design-science),thatcanbejustified(behavioural-science)
and evaluated (design-science) to meet the business needs.(Hevner et al., 2004)
The knowledge base consists of what is already known in the form of foundations
andmethodologies. Suitableandrelevantapplicationofbothleadstorigorestablished
in data collection and empirical analysis (behavioural science) and evaluation of the
quality and effectiveness of artifacts (design science). (Hevner et al., 2004)
The relevance of the research can be analysed by how much it contributes to both
the business needs and knowledge base.
Based on this framework, the following methods selected within the Design
Thinking and Co-Design framework help to build and evaluate a design artifact of a
tangible tabletop to solve 100%FAT’s business need of offering a unique selling point
through multiple tokens.
4.2 Literature Review
A literature review looks at books, articles, dissertations, conference proceedings, and
other available resources based on pre-defined goals on what information is searched
for. The findings can then be summarised and inform the work.(Digital Society
School, n.d.)
For this research, the review of relevant literature acts as the knowledge base
(Figure 5) to understand the designing for and prototyping of tangible tabletops, as
well as related and important interaction design principles. It also informs on how to
measure the different variables of usability, engagement and learning for an effective
evaluation.
Thisisawell-establishedmethodwhichsupportsansweringallthreesubResearch
Questions.
4.3 Stakeholder Interviews with Co-Design Activity
As a first step in justifying the design and development of the artifact, the following
section describes the chosen stakeholder-involved methods for gathering information:
interviews combined with Co-Design sessions involving bodystorming and rough
prototyping.
ThesemethodsarelocatedwithintheISResearchfield(Figure5),asthestakeholder
interviews provide important input to guide the development of relevant artifacts,
whiletheCo-Designactivityalsosupportstheearlycreationofartifactsthroughdirect
user involvement.
Through this approach, the methods help ensure that the artifact addresses real-
world needs (Relevance) while also being systematically assessed and refined (Rigor).
Theywillalsohelpinaddressingsub-RQ1andinunderstandinghowtheunderlying
game can be designed, which therefore informs sub-RQ2.
24
--- Page 25 ---
4.3.1 Semi-Structured Interviews
Interviews are a one on one activity that can be applied when information from a user
and/or expert are needed. It can be used for discovering personal information and
gathering qualitative information. (Digital Society School, n.d.)
There are different kinds of interviews. While structured interviews follow a
strict guideline, unstructured interviews have no predetermined set of questions.
Semi-structured interviews present a blend of both by allowing for more flexibility in
the data collection but still following a thematic guideline. However, the questions
covered in such guidelines need not to be fixed in order or number, and additional
questions may be asked based on the participant’s answers. (George, 2022)
Stakeholder interviews in specific can help to understand the stakeholders’ expec-
tations towards a product by gathering their perspectives and needs(Haque, Saxena,
Weathington, Chudzik, & Guha, 2024; Buchan, Bano, Zowghi, McDonell, & Shinde,
2017).
Through this method, collecting data from all relevant involved parties, such as
users and those that develop the product is possible. By asking open-ended questions
through such semi-structured interviews, taken notes and/or transcribes can later
be coded and thematically analysed to learn about the stakeholders’ point of view.
(Buchan et al., 2017)
Based on the later developed Actors Map (see 5.1.1), two main categories of
stakeholders get interviewed: Users and experts (see 5.1.2). For both, a guideline gets
created which covers an introduction, demographic questions, a set of key questions
specific to the participant’s role, a summary and a wrap-up (Appendix B).
For the users, the main goal with the interview is to understand their familiarity
with tangible or interactive tabletops and their expectations towards the setup and use.
This will inform how the interaction is expected to be modelled in order to answer
sub-RQ1, as wellas how itis expectedto be usable, engaging and educationalin order
to answer sub-RQ2.
For the experts, the main goal is to learn from their area of expertise regarding
creating games that encourage usability, engagement, and learning, prototyping for
digital and physical installations, and what makes a successful museum installation.
Therefore, their input will also inform sub-RQ1 and 2.
4.3.2 Bodystorming and Rough Prototyping
As proposed in Asaad et al. (2024), after conducting interviews, a Co-Design activity
can follow. Based on this, the planned and conducted stakeholder interviews for this
researchgetcombinedwithabodystormingandroughprototypingCo-Designsession.
Bodystorming uses the engagement of the whole body to spark ideas and to gain
early insights into the embodied experience(Segura et al., 2024) (see 2.2). Rough
prototypingontheotherhandisapowerfulCo-Designactivitywithwhichparticipants
cantranslatetheirthoughtsintotangibleobjectsthroughsimplematerialssuchaspaper,
penandscissors (ServiceDesignTools,n.d.). Thistechniquealsorelatestoexperience
prototyping as participants can create a form of representation to communicate what
25
--- Page 26 ---
interacting with, in this case, a tangible tabletop might be like(Buchenau & Suri,
2000).
By providing the stakeholders with these simple materials to build representations
while bodystorming, they can show and tell their expectations towards the interaction
with multiple available tokens on a tangible tabletop by roleplaying and drafting
themselves. This will contribute significantly to answering sub-RQ1 and 2.
Atthebeginning,participantsaregivenanintroductionandbackgroundinformation
for the activity. They are instructed to try to use 20 tokens and to think out loud. They
are also given background information about the energy grid and the scenario about
being in a museum exhibition about the Dutch energy grid. They are asked to show
what they notice, what makes them want to interact with such an installation and what
they expect to happen. (Appendix B).
4.3.3 Setup
Each interview and Co-Design session gets carried out in one room. After a pilot test,
the refined setup is as follows.
Before starting with the session, the participant gets welcomed and presented
with the participant information sheet to read (Appendix C) and consent form to sign
(AppendixD). Then,theinterviewfollows. Aftertheinterviewisdone,theparticipant
is asked to leave the room for a short break. In this time, the room gets prepared for
the Co-Design activity. This research procedure was checked and approved by the
ethical committee of Computer & Information Sciences (CIS) from the University of
Twente under RP 250163.
For the Co-Design activity, the screen of the tangible tabletop gets simulated
throughsheetsofpaperandwrappingpaperonatable. Ontopofit,afewrepresentations
of tokens such as paper cups, blocks of post-its or pieces of cardboard are already
placed. Next to it, more of these materials are available, together with prototyping
tools such as pens and scissors. On the wall, a second screen is simulated through
sheets of paper and wrapping paper. Next to it, a sign says ‘The Energy Grid: An
Interactive Game. Explore the workings of the Dutch energy grid in an interactive
way!’. The whole setup can be seen in Figure 6.
4.3.4 Analysis Method
DuringthestakeholderinterviewsandCo-Designactivities,qualitativedataiscollected
through notes, observations, photographs, and voice- and video-recordings.
To analyse qualitative data, Taylor-Powell and Renner (2003) suggest to first get to
know the data that is being analysed before focusing the analysis which will help in
getting started with the process by organising the data. Afterwards, the information is
supposed to get categorised, which is the most important part by identifying repeating
themesorpatterns. Lastly,patternscangetidentifiedwithinandbetweenthecategories
to understand for example the relative importance of a category and the relationships
betweencategoriesbeforethedatacanbeinterpretedbyexplainingthefindingsbacked
up by quotes or descriptive examples. (Taylor-Powell & Renner, 2003)
26
--- Page 27 ---
Figure 6: Bodystorming and Rough Prototyping Setup.
27
--- Page 28 ---
Inthiswork,thisgetsappliedbygettingfamiliarisedwiththedatabeforeorganising
it by question. The created documents are then imported into Atlas.ti(ATLAS.ti
ScientificSoftwareDevelopmentGmbH,2025). Beforestartingtocodeandcategorise
the information, preset categories are set based on key questions the analysis should
answer, but emergent categories are welcomed as well. To "identify patterns and
connections within and between categories"(Taylor-Powell & Renner, 2003), the
identified codes and categories get imported into Miro (Miro, 2025) and interpreted.
4.4 Competitive Analysis
A competitive analysis "help[s] [a] businesses gain valuable insight into the market"
(UXPlanet,2020). Forexample,acompanycanseethestrengthsandweaknessesofits
competitors, identifygaps in the marketanddefenddesign choices(UX Planet, 2020).
This makes it a powerful tool at the beginning of the UX design process(DaSilva,
2020) and therefore informs the IS Research field by guiding design decisions based
on what is currently being done and user expectations (Figure 5).
One tool of the competitive analysis is a feature comparison matrix(Goretskaya,
2023). Such a matrix consists of "rows of features and columns of competitors to
compare the product mix available from each competitor" (Goretskaya, 2023).
For this research, the feature comparison is mainly used to identify possible
design choices for the simulation and the interaction and therefore supports answering
sub-RQ2.
28
--- Page 29 ---
5 Empathising with the User
In the first phase of the Design Thinking cycle, user research is applied to empathise
with the problem, the user and their needs (Interaction Design Foundation, 2025b).
5.1 Key Stakeholders
By involving stakeholders in the design process through Co-Design they can help
shape the development of the product or artifact. However, it is crucial to first identify
the right stakeholders. (Asaad et al., 2024)
AnActorsMaphelpsdoingsoandactsasabasetodecidewhatspecificstakeholders
get interviewed and involved in the interview and Co-Design activity.
5.1.1 Actors Map
The Actors Map is a method from the design method toolkit(Digital Society School,
n.d.). Ithelpstounderstandtherelationshipsbetweentheinvolvedpartiesandlistcore
stakeholders. By connecting the stakeholders and describing how they are related, the
communication between them can be analysed.
In regards to this research, the aim of this method is to identify those stakeholders
that should get involved in the conducted interview and Co-Design activities.
The final Actors Map can be seen in Figure 7 and consists of five types of
stakeholders.
Figure 7: Actors Map.
29
--- Page 30 ---
As stakeholders from the academic point of view, the EIT Digital Master School
as umbrella organisation of the double-degree ITC Innovation programme, Aalto
University, andUniversityofTwenteallbringindifferentexpectationsandregulations
thatneedtobecommunicatedwith100%FATandinfluencethecontentofthepractical
work.
100%FAT has the gaol to build a tangible tabletop for a variety of clients that
could be interested in renting such an installation. Such a client could be, for example,
a local museum that would like to display an exhibition regarding the Dutch energy
grid. The museum on the other hand would then like to engage their visitors in the
exhibition through the installation, offer educational value and make the installation
easy to use for the visitors. The software company that creates the software for the
interface also communicates with 100%FAT and vice versa.
As key stakeholders, this map therefore identifies (1) 100%FAT, (2) the possible
client(s), in this use case a local museum, and (3) the end users of the installation, in
this use case museum visitors.
5.1.2 Interviewed Stakeholders
Based on the identified key stakeholders, two participant groups are recruited for the
interview and Co-Design sessions. These are potential end users on the one hand, and
experts in the field of game design and/or physical and digital installation building
and/or with a museum background on the other hand.
To identify suitable end users, a verbal screener needs to be passed. This consists
of three closed questions whether they like to go to museums, are interested in
technologicalinstallations, andareabove18yearsold. Ifthesequestionsareanswered
with yes, they are invited to participate. To recruit end users, convenience sampling is
used. Conveniencesamplingrefersto"recruitingbasedonconvenience",whichapplies
to recruiting people that are close to the personal network and more conveniently to
reach (Baxter, Courage, & Caine, 2015).
The recruited experts are either from the case company 100%FAT, the University
of Twente, or from a museum with which the case company has links. Experts from
100%FAT and the university have previous experience in designing or developing a
game and building a combined physical and digital installation, which is why they get
asked expert key questions A and B from the interview guideline, while experts from
the museum get interviewed with expert key questions C (Appendix B). Convenience
sampling is also used to recruit the experts.
In total, five end users and six experts participate in the interview and Co-Design
session. Mostofthem(sevenoutofeleven)areagedbetween25and34,threebetween
35and44andonebetween55and65. ApartfromoneparticipantbeingfromGermany
and one from Italy, all other participants are from the Netherlands.
The end users (labelled with U and their personal identification number, e.g. U1)
have a variety of occupations, while most of the experts have a technical background.
The following Table (1) shows an overview ofthe interviewedexperts (labelledwithE
and their personal identification number, e.g. E1) and their area of expertise.
Whiletheexpertsallhaverelevantexperiencewithplayingandbuildinginteractive
30
--- Page 31 ---
Label Stakeholder Area of Expertise
E1 100%FAT Game design and hybrid installation building
E2 100%FAT Game design and hybrid installation building
E3 100%FAT Game design and hybrid installation building
E4 100%FAT Game design and hybrid installation building
E5 Museum Museum exhibitions
E6 University of Twente Game design and hybrid installation building
Table 1:Interviewed Experts
or tangible tabletops, four out of five users have hardly ever played with one and
thereforehavemuchlessexperiencewiththisinteractiontechnology. Moststakeholders
(nine out of eleven), like to play games with the most named category being board
games. Next to that, also video or card games were meant as examples.
The demographics of the stakeholders present limitations in the data collection
that can influence the quality, which need to be addressed(Taylor-Powell & Renner,
2003). Due to convenience sampling, moststakeholders were agedbelow 34, meaning
they represent a younger age group which might have different experiences and
expectations towards technology than older generations since they use a greater
variety of technologies(Olson, O’Brien, Rogers, & Charness, 2010). Similarly, the
participants’experienceofplayinggamescouldinfluencetheirexpectationsandshould
be taken into account.
5.2 Stakeholder Perspectives
Thissectioncoversthestakeholderperspectivesonthechallengeswithmultipletokens
as well as their expectations towards the setup, simulation and interaction with the
tokens.
5.2.1 Challenges with Multiple Tokens
As the main research objective involves the integration of around 20 tokens on a
tangible tabletop, this may present some anticipated challenges from a stakeholder
perspective.
Stakeholders mentioned that the amount of tokens could feel overwhelming and
increase the mental load. For example, during the Co-Design, where multiple objects
representing tokens where placed on the table, U3 mentioned that more tokens feel
like more work, and E1 addressed: "It is too much happening on the table [..]. People
don’t know where they should look" (E1).
Anotherchallengeappearsduetothetimeconstraintofhavingthetangibletabletop
inamuseumsetting. Explainedbytwoexperts(E3,E5),thegamesimulationcanonly
have a duration span of around two minutes to avoid players feeling overwhelmed or
lose interest, as explained by E3: "Two minutes should be the entire game most of the
time. Otherwise, people will walk away." This provides limited time in understanding
and exploring the multiple tokens.
31
--- Page 32 ---
"Tryingtointeractwiththeobjectsasthedesignerintended"(U4),sounderstanding
how to use the tokens in general, as well as "understanding that there is multi model
interaction" (U2) available are further mentioned challenges, along with aspects such
as"asmallworkspace"(U1)ofhavingnotenoughroomtointeractwiththetokensand
table, having "physical objects [...] hid[ing] important information" (U5) or having the
"setup crash[ing] when you add[...] too many [objects]" (U5).
5.2.2 Expectations
The stakeholders have different expectations towards the setup, simulation and the
token interaction, which often interlink and are intertwined.
The most important recurring themes are the use of visual cues, immediate user
feedback, simple game mechanics and a clear goal.
Setup
To be invited to interact with a museum installation, users expect the setup to use
visual cuesand value thedesign of the installation. In terms of visual cues, they
mention standby animations (U2, U4, U5), as explained by U5: “If it’s in standby
mode, at least have some [...] animation that it is visible that it is not just a display
showing a PowerPoint”, or the use of lights (U2, U4), as explained by U4 that “you
could see from the distance that there [is] light shining on it”. In order to achieve an
attractiveinstallationdesign,itcould,forexample,relatetothethemeoftheunderlying
simulation (U2, U4), as highlighted by U2 "to have the table [design] related to the
topic".
The second screenhanging on a wall next to the table during the Co-Design,
was often not considered when stakeholders were interacting with the tokens on the
tabletop. This is why it is expected that the screen will beplaced closerto the main
tabletop (U1, U2, U4), as explained by U1: "The screen should be right next to
the table so it’s easy to see for everyone", and, more importantly, will display only
secondary information. The latter was highlighted through its relative importance,
being mentioned by nine out of eleven stakeholders (E1, E2, E3, E4, E5, U1, U2, U4,
U5). For example E1 explained that "the main feedback should be on the table", while
U4 mentioned that "the screen might be nice as statistics overview" with what E5
agreed to “put all the meters and statistics here [on the screen]” by “maybe here [on
the table] you put things and there [on the screen] you see the results”. Alternatively,
if more than secondary information is displayed, this indicates that users need to be
prompted or nudged into looking at the second screen.
Moreover, U1 and U4 mentioned that enoughspace around the table needs to be
available and that "a comfortable workheight [is] important" (U1) as well.
Simulation
With the same amount of mentions like the second screen containing only secondary
information, stakeholders most importantly expectvisual feedbackregarding the
32
--- Page 33 ---
simulation (E1, E2, E3, E4, E6, U1, U2, U4, U5). This could include animations
("For the coal power plant you have all the smoke and then [the smoke] might have a
direction which also depends on the wind turbines. For example, if I place [the wind
turbine token] here [the smoke] goes this way, if I place [the token] here [the smoke]
goes into the city" (E1)) or hints of the current system status by playing with different
colours of lights ("There is a continuous disbalance and the longer it is in disbalance
the more red the power plants become" (E6)).
Around half of the stakeholders also expect thatcollaboration is possible (E1,
E2, E6, U1, U2, U5), such as stated by U5: "What you can do is for example work
together, like one person managing the production side, one person managing the
consumption side", andsound are supported (E2, U2, U3, U4, U5), as highlighted by
E2: "Let’s say you are guiding the player into doing the right thing then you can have
a happy sound when they are close to an answer". Others highlight asimplified game
(E1, E5, U3, U5), like U3: "[The game] being too difficult is not nice, it is better if it’s
alittlebiteasyandthatpeoplepickupsomethingaboutit", thatcommunicatesa clear
goal(E3, U3, U4), as alsoU3 mentioned: "I justliketo haveclarityofwhatthe endof
the game is", and provides a good introduction ortutorial (E3, U3, U4), as described
by U4: "Like a little tutorial or something, step by step learning the system by doing".
Towards the session design, it wasnot clearwhether adrop-in and drop-out
or a guided experience is preferred by the stakeholders. However, positive aspects
mentioned with the drop-in and drop-out session, such as having no time constraints
to freely explore the interaction (U1, U5), such as highlighted by U1: "If [the game]
has time goals [...], that is not motivating me personally. But if it is free to build and I
canjustdoasaIlikeandstopwhenIthinkIamdonethatgivesmethemostjoy",lose
importance since it is known that museum visitors only interact with an installation
forup to two minutes (E3, E5), as already mentioned thatE3 explained: "Two minutes
should be the entire game most of the time".
Token Interaction
Visual cuesshould be used to make it clear to users that they are supposed to interact
withthetokens. Theycanbegivenbyvisiblehintssuchas"put[ting]abigarrowinthe
middle with a circle where people have to place [the token]" (E3), "when it looks like
somebody has already interacted with [the tokens]" (U1), using lights shining towards
thetokenssince"lightsareaprettygoodindicatorthatsomethingcanbemoved"(U4),
and "have some kind of animation" (U5). In addition, the visible placement of the
tokensinthesetupordirectlyonthetableisimportant(U2, U4, U5), asU2described:
"I think [the token] has to be in the space where you actually interact. I’m thinking it
can be either on the side or on the tabletop".
Also, the already mentioned clearly communicatedgoalshould activelyinclude
thetokensto help understanding that it is supposed to interact with them, since U4
explained "if there is like a clearly displayed goal, that also helps, because then you
know there is a need to work towards this goal with the tangibles". Additionally,
among others, incorporatingsounds through, for instance, "soft music playing" (U1),
or "atutorial on the screen or whatever it is, like physical thing that can tell you,
33
--- Page 34 ---
alright, first step how to interact with this" (U2) can support the interaction.
When interacting with the tokens,immediate user feedbackis most crucial to
show stakeholders that the interaction has been successfully recognised by the system
and is intended (E2, E3, U1, U2, U3, U4). For instance, E2 explained that "when you
press [the token] down, something should appear on the table" and U1 expressed his
wish, while sliding a token during the Co-Designing, to be able to "move [the token]
around like this and I can see [the UI] changing in real-time".
Additionally, they expect the tokens to have differentroles and functions, which
their form and shapeshould determine and mimic (E1, E2, U1, U3, U4, U5). For
instance, the shape of the token should indicate what energy supplier it is representing
(E1, E2, U1, U4), as E2 explained while holding one of the paper cups during the
Co-Designing: "For example, [if] the cup is a nuclear reactor, I would expect the cup
to look like one", and the same token could be available in different sizes indicating
with bigger sizes more energy production or more energy demand (U1, U3, U4, U5),
like U1 mentioned "I think it’s nice if [...] the objects sort of have a value, like this is a
windmill, this is a bigger windmill, this is a medium windmill".
To manipulate the tokens, they mostly expect to be able tolift and place(E2, E4,
U2, U3, U5) ordrag them (E2, E4, U2, U5) on the tabletop surface, as observed
during the Co-Designing. When asked about the type of movement, E4 explained:
“That depends, I have now made very flat cards”, that they had picked up and placed,
“butIfIwould,forexample,havesomethinglikethis[abiggerblock],Iwoulddothis”,
while dragging it on the table “so it kind of depends on the shape of the tangible”,
while for cup-sized tokens it “depends on their weight. I know cups are very light so
I would just pick it up and put it there. But if it has a bit more weight to it I would
probably move it like that”, while dragging the cup on the tabletop surface. U5 on the
other hand highlighted the influence of distance, with shorter distances being more
likely to drag the tokens than lift them, as they explained after showing the lifting and
placing of a token, "if you just need to move it like this [a little to the side], then this
is fine”, while dragging it. Others also expect to be able torotate, split, connect,
or groupthe objects (E2, U1, U4, U5). For example, U4 envisioned that "stacking
[multiple tokens] would make that one energy source bigger".
Moreover, some wish forvisible placeholdersof the tokens on or off the screen.
On the screen, it could help placing the tokens correctly "if you have rounds where
you can put the [tokens]" (U3), while off the screen it could indicate where to put the
tokens when resetting the simulation, as well as helping to understand which tokens
have already been taken (E1: "If you have spots here [on the sides] for them, you can
detect if they’re [taken]").
Other examples of expectations cover thattextshould beavoided(U1, U3, U4),
since, for instance, U3 explained that "it takes effort to read on the screen", but also
the simulationsettingsshould beremembered and restoredafter manipulating the
tokens(E2,U5),ashighlightedbyU5aftermovingatoken: "Ifit’spossibleIwouldlike
to have the same presets, the same settings, I had before, so [the system] remembered
the settings". Moreover,haptics could be involved (E1, E2) by incorporating for
example E1’s idea that "you could have them vibrate if they break down", and the
token design should besturdy (U1, U3), as U1 highlighted they should "look less
damageable", so "solid, not easy to be broken".
34
--- Page 35 ---
6 Analysis of Empathising and Context of Use
The following looks at the findings of the empathising stage by analysing the target
group’s characteristics and behaviours in relation to tangible tabletops. It is also
important at this stage to consider the context of use and the effect of different design
choices on it. Additionally, the focus will be on the different usability, engagement
and learning measurement techniques, and what can be learned from competitors’
offerings.
6.1 Target Group Analysis
As mentioned in section 5.1.2, the interviewed users indicate that the target group is
less experienced with interactive or tangible tabletops, introducing this TUI as a novel
interaction type to them. Additionally, most of them enjoy playing games, especially
board games, in their leisure time. In general, most of them are unfamiliar with the
concepts and functioning of the energy grid, with four out of five saying they know
little or nothing about it.
Based on E5, most museum visitors are families consisting of parents, and/or
grandparents, and children. Alternatively, elderlies or younger school students visit
museums as well. However, the visiting demographics change depending on the type
of museum. E5 highlights that the visitor demographic of one of the museums in
Enschede, the Netherlands, is characterised by being richer and having more museum
card holders, compared to another museum in the same city, which tends to attract
lower income families. Museum card holders in the Netherlands are mostly 35 to 64
years old (Statista, 2022).
Especially the older generations expect digital installations to be an add-on to a
main exhibit and not introduce or cover a topic by itself. The visitors also prefer the
physicality of things and tend to come back for interactive installations they like. (E5)
As presented by Almeshari, Dowell, and Nyhan (2020), Falk (2016) identified
five types of personas visiting science centres, which could be the type of museum
where this tangible tabletop simulating an energy grid could be displayed. These are
the personas of Explorer, Facilitator (divided into Socialiser Facilitator and Parental
Facilitator), Experience Seeker, Professional/Hobbyist and Recharger, who all have
different motivations and goals in visiting such a facility. Based on these, Almeshari,
Dowell, and Nyhan (2019) mapped each of these persona’s motivation with their
perceived success criteria, which can be seen in Figure 8 and shows that each visitor’s
characteristics influence their welcomed outcome of a visit.
The museum visitors also act as the decision-makers during the interaction with
the tangible tabletop(Kubicki et al., 2012). In such a simulation, they collaborate to
make joint decisions and actively interact by manipulating the tokens(Lebrun, Adam,
Mandiau, & Kolski, 2015).
However, if the tangible tabletop supports collaboration, the target group’s be-
havioursalsoleadtochallenges. Theycanhindereachotherbye.g. bumpingarmsand
collaborating also slows down the interaction. Personal characteristics of the players
35
--- Page 36 ---
Figure 8: Motivation and perceived success criteria of science centre visitorpersonas
(Almeshari et al., 2019).
influence the experience as well, as collaboration gets worse when players are not
familiar with each other. (Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
When interacting with a tangible tabletop, the target group might face problematic
situations leading to key questions they ask themselves that stand out in the flow of
the experience(Hansen & Halskov, 2014). Related to Hansen and Halskov (2014),
these can be for example: "What can I do here? What is the relationship between the
different tangibles? How can I manipulate [specific aspects of the simulation]? What
would make the current [simulation] better?".
Strategies to solve these questions involve behavioural aspects such as turning
the tokens over, adding or removing tokens, removing all tokens, or tweaking tokens
slowly and methodically(Hansen & Halskov, 2014). These strategies have also been
observed during the Co-Design session, for example, by all of the stakeholders adding
additional tokens, U1 removing all tokens at the beginning or U5 rotating them.
6.2 Design Implications
Whendesigningfortangibletabletops,variousaspectsneedtobekeptinmind. Among
them are design considerations for the setup, simulation and tokens of the tabletops,
how to design for usability, engagement and learning, as well as how to prototype for
tangible interactions.
36
--- Page 37 ---
6.2.1 Design Considerations for Setup, Simulation and Tokens
Therearemultipledesignchoicesthatneedtobeconsideredwhendesigningatangible
tabletop setup, its underlying simulation, and the tokens.
Design Considerations for Setup and Simulation
Figure 9 shows various design considerations for a tangible tabletop setup based on
Da Costa, Zen, and Tavares (2024) and Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, and Tavares
(2024).
Figure 9: Design Considerations Setup based on Da Costa, Zen, and Tavares (2024);
Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, and Tavares (2024).
Firstly, the simulation should "support walk up and use"(Hansen & Halskov,
2014), which could be achieved through space around the tangible tabletop, that could
also make the interaction more intuitive. The available space has the effect of inviting
users to move around the table, which some, based on their characteristics, prefer to
do rather than standing in one position.(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa,
Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
Due to these spatial arrangements of users, which relate to where users position
themselves around the table, different territorial areas emerge. The area closest to the
user is considered as their personal area, while the central area is seen as the common
interaction area. Due to the users moving around as well as due to cross interaction,
where users overlap in their interaction zones, they could also block each other’s view.
(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
Therefore, feedback that can be seen or felt even when the visual view is obscured
should be provided by the simulation.
37
--- Page 38 ---
The setup including its tokens and the simulation should also promote verbal and
gesturalcommunication between the users forsuccessful collaboration by letting them
think together and react to changes(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa, Zen,
De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024; Kubicki et al., 2012). This is also confirmed by Hansen
and Halskov (2014), stating the design principle of "support[ing] both individual and
social play" by having a built in nudge of socialising. The simulation should also
be easy to use to support natural interaction for people from different backgrounds
(Lebrun et al., 2014).
When collaboration is supported by allowing multiple users to join, it is crucial to
understandtheinterplayoftheavailabledegreesoffreedom. Degreesoffreedomrelate
tothenumberoftokensthatcanbemanipulatedortheamountofinvolvedusers. Each
additional token provides the user with an additional degree of freedom, which also
meansthattheyhaveanimpactontheuser’sperformance. Itissuggestedthatreducing
the degrees of freedom in simpler tasks provides a greater sense of control, while
increasing the degrees of freedom in more complex tasks can improve performance.
This relates to the challenge stakeholders mentioned of feeling overwhelmed when the
amount of tokens, and therefore the amount of degrees of freedom, increases (5.2.1).
(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
To improve performance, bimanual interaction can be allowed which refers to the
use of both hands asymmetrically or complementarily. If this use of interaction is
supported, itcan boostthe user’s feeling ofproductivity by getting theirnon-dominant
hand to act as a frame of reference for their dominant one. Even though it can be
complex, bimanual interaction is more efficient. Here, a higher number of tokens
might be beneficial, as E4, for example, actively used both hands to interact when
multiple tokens were placed on the table.(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa,
Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
Additionally, authority is an aspect the simulation should consider. Authority is
linked to competition, which occurs when users are able to collaborate and perform
competing tasks simultaneously. To moderate the relationship between users but also
of a user with the system, roles of authority need to be defined at every moment of
the interaction. To clarify who is in control of the interaction, feedback in form of
audio, text and images can be used.(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa, Zen,
De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
Itisimportantthatthesetextsandimages, ifincluded, cannotbeinanyorientation
as every user independently from their positioning should be able to follow what is
happening (Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares,
2024). To support the understanding of the interaction and simulation, feedback in the
formofvisualortactileshouldbeprovidedafteraninteractionwithatoken (DaCosta,
Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024). This could also
help "encourag[ing] exploration" and "enabl[ing] emergent use"(Hansen & Halskov,
2014).
Lastly, also the height and size of the table needs to be considered. Too low tables
might discourage taller users to engage with it while higher tables exclude smaller
people and children. The larger the table is, the more difficult collaboration gets as
specificareascanbecomehardertoreach. (DaCosta,Zen,&Tavares,2024;DaCosta,
Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
38
--- Page 39 ---
Design Considerations for Tokens
Regarding the design of the tokens, their form and shapes play an important role.
It is possible to match special actions with a form, for example that cubes perform
oneactionandcylindersanother (Hansen&Halskov,2014). However,theshapeofthe
token should also provide a hint of what kind of action can be performed(Da Costa,
Zen, DeOliveira, &Tavares, 2024). Someobjectscantherebyrepresentactualobjects
relatedto the simulation, while others can perform actions to handle ormanipulate the
simulation, such as slowing down, zooming or moving a map (Kubicki et al., 2012).
In any case, the colour, texture and size of each token influence how users interact
with and use it. Most importantly, its shape should support the user in grabbing the
token. (Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
The initial arrangement of the tokens before they are used and how close they are
to the user influence the usage as well.(Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024)
Identifiedmovementtypesthatshouldbesupportedthroughthedesignwithtokens
are picking-up, dropping and dragging them; or adding, moving and removing them
(Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024; Kubicki et al., 2012). The dragging
movement is performed better when dragged towards oneself instead of moving the
tokenactivelyintoanotheruser’spersonalarea (DaCosta,Zen,DeOliveira,&Tavares,
2024).
In general, after interacting with a token or while being actively involved in the
simulation, tokens should provide feedback, e.g. visually or through sound. This can
be achieved by illuminating and interacting with other tokens based on their position
and proximity, which could be visualised through different kind of connecting lines,
or displayed auras around the tokens. (Hansen & Halskov, 2014)
6.2.2 Designing for Usability, Engagement, and Learning
Tounderstandhowatangibletabletopsettingcanbedesignedintuitively,engaging,and
educational, the following sub-sections willaddress eachofthese areas bythemselves.
As highlighted before (2.4), it is important to understand that all three variables
are linked, which also results in the presented design implications to be related or
duplicated.
Designing for Usability
In general, intuitive design can be achieved through applied design guidelines and
interaction principles, such as Nielsen’s 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface
Design (Nielsen, 2024a), Don Norman’s Principles of Interaction Design(Interaction
Design Foundation, 2025a), Tog’s Principles(Tognazzini, 2014), or the DIN EN ISO
9241-110 Dialog Design Principles (usability.de, n.d.).
Tosuccessfullydesignintuitivegameinteractions,itismostimportanttomakeuse
of visual elements, with aspects such as clear Call to Actions (E3, E4) directing the
attention of the user (E1), colour coding (E2), attractive images (E6), or animations
(E1, E4). Additionally, as mentioned in the expectations of the stakeholders, visible
39
--- Page 40 ---
hints should be applied to clarify the usage of the tokens. These aspects resonate
with Nielsen’s heuristic of ‘Visibility of System Status’(Nielsen, 2024a), as well
as Norman’s concepts of ‘Signifiers’(Interaction Design Foundation, 2025a) and
‘Visibility’ (Rekhi, 2018).
SimilartoNielsen’s‘VisibilityofSystemStatus’,whichispointingoutto"[p]resent
feedback to the user as quickly as possible"(Nielsen, 2024a), Norman’s interaction
principle of ‘Feedback’ suggests to "making it clear to the user what action has been
taken and what has been accomplished"(Rekhi, 2018). As highly expected by the
stakeholders, E4 also stresses the importance of integrating such user feedback to
indicatewhethertheuseofatokenwascorrect. Moreover, feedbackcouldbeincluded
on the tokens themselves through visuals or haptics (E1).
The concept of ‘Signifiers’ is linked with ‘Affordance’. While signifiers guide the
user in understanding "where and how to take action" with an object, affordances are
clues in how to interact with it(Interaction Design Foundation, 2025a; Rekhi, 2018).
The tokens should therefore have strong affordances to make it very clear that they
can be grabbed and moved.
However, the design of the tokens should also limit possible interaction errors by,
for example, designing the grabbing gesture of the tokens in a way that fingers do
not automatically touch the screen (E3), aligning with Nielsen’s ‘Error prevention’ to
prevent unwanted mistakes from happening (Nielsen, 2024a).
Nevertheless, as described later in section 2.4, the system needs to allow for trial
and error to achieve a learning effect which can be reached through Tog’s principle of
‘Explorable interfaces’ (Tognazzini, 2014).
To elevate the understanding of what functions the tokens represent, both the
stakeholders and known design considerations expect that their form and shapes
represent real objects related to the simulation. Nielsen’s heuristic of ‘Match Between
the System and the Real World’ supports this, stating the the "mental models around
importantconcepts" (Nielsen,2024a)needtobetakenintoaccount. Thisprinciplealso
focuses on using the words of the target group instead of complicated and unknown
terms (Nielsen, 2024a).
To keep matching the users’ mental models, it is also important to build on known
interaction patterns (E2, E6), which relates to DIN EN ISO 9241-110’s principle of
‘Conformity with User Expectations’ (usability.de, n.d.).
To make the interactions intuitive, the experts explained that they have to be
learned first. Therefore, at the beginning of the experience, a tutorial can help
explaining the novel interactions step by step (E1, E2, E4, E6), with new elements
being introduced gradually (E1, E5). This also matches the stakeholders expectation
of a good introduction and relates to Tog’s principle of ‘Learnability’(Tognazzini,
2014).
To not overwhelm the users, the UI should be clean and the simulation should run
visuallyassmoothaspossible(E4). ThisrelatestoNielsen’sheuristicof‘Aestheticand
Minimalist Design’(Nielsen, 2024a) and Tog’s principle of ‘Aesthetics’(Tognazzini,
2014).
40
--- Page 41 ---
Designing for Engagement
To design for engagement, gamification can have a positive influence, which includes
elements from games into non-game environments(Souropetsis & Kyza, 2025).
Although the tangible tabletop simulation will be in the realm of an educational and
serious game, and therefore an actual game, gamification still shows which game
elements influence engagement.
Gamification can level up engagement by addressing the aspects of motivation and
reward by creating a feeling of competition and achievement but also incorporating
accomplishments and progression(Hyzy & Wardle, 2023). This way, the experience
canbecomemoreenjoyableandsatisfying. ThisagreeswithE2suggestingcompetition
throughascoringsystemwherespecificactionslettheusergainmorepointsasrewards,
or E4 also mentioning competition as an element to drive engagement.
Collaboration with others can also be addressed, as a sense of community can
be created, which can encourage interaction between users(Hyzy & Wardle, 2023).
Adding to that, E2 suggests that cooperating with other users or with the game itself
supports engagement.
Apart from gamification elements, the experts pointed out that a simple and
understandable game setup elevates engagement (E3, E6). As explained by E3:
"People need to be taken in by the game within three seconds [...]. [That is why you
need to] tutorialise the game within three to five seconds, so they understand what
they have to do, and then you can ramp up the difficulty and add some decisions, but
that should be minimal because if people don’t get it, they walk away, or when they
make a wrong choice they also get demotivated".
Additionally, immediate user feedback to an interaction (E4, E6), a sense of
exploration(E2,E6)andacertainamountofvisualfidelity(E4)willdriveengagement.
Alsopowerfulsounddesigncanhaveanimpactespeciallycombinedwithasimpler
game play. Sound effects and background music can raise the experience and add a
sense of urgency or relaxation depending on what wants to be achieved (E3).
Designing for Learning
As addressed in section 2.4, informal learning, educational and serious games all rely
on learning from mistakes, self-discovery and experimenting. Therefore, E1, E4 and
E6alsoemphasisedtheimportanceofsupportingtrialanderrorexplorationtoachieve
a learning outcome by allowing the users to make mistakes.
Tindall, Patterson, and Costain (2018) also mention that motivation is a key
ingredient to reach learning and refer to Nick Yee’s theory(Yee, 2007) how players
can be motivated. This theory lists (1) achievement, (2) immersion and (3) social
factors as influencers.
Intrinsic motivation can be increased through success, while failure decreases
it. Offering small (1) achievements such as rewards can make the player feel more
competent and therefore motivate. However, it is important that rewards should not
power the objective of education learning. Rewards can be achieved through visual
effects like erupting particles (E4), or, as described in designing for engagement
41
--- Page 42 ---
(6.2.2), through point scores (E2). (2) Immersion can promote motivation by offering
a coherent story in the ideal context which will hold the player’s attention, while (3)
social engagement offers social interaction and exploration. (Tindall et al., 2018)
This is also related to collaborative learning mentioned by E6, which is a theory
stating that working together and reaching agreements within a group helps students
learn and should therefore be supported through design(Karjalainen, Puuska, &
Kokkonen, 2021).
Interestingly,asTindalletal.(2018)listattentionasafactor,whichcanbeachieved
through immersion, and in turn motivates users, Cutting and Iacovides (2022) state
as a finding of their study that neither motivation nor cognitive load but attention
itself increases learning in games. However, they do agree that immersion is highly
important to create sustained attentional focus. They found that the learning effect is
higher in intrinsically integrated games with the help of attentional mechanisms.
Intrinsicintegrationisagamedesignprinciplesuggestingthatthelearningcontent
should be built into the main mechanics of the game. Users can only process elements
on a screen they actually pay attention to, and only these elements can then be
transferred into learning. Therefore, the players’ attention should be directed to
elements that are needed for the game task. (Cutting & Iacovides, 2022)
E2 agrees with this, mentioning that the game element should be connected to the
learning outcome.
Attention can be kept onto a game through e.g. rewards, feedbacks and game-play
breakdowns or breakthroughs, such as tutorials, and also kept within a game through
game design features such as clear goals or uncertainty. (Cutting & Iacovides, 2022)
In addition, the experts stated that the fun of the game should be at the forefront,
which could then facilitate learning (E1, E2), and the power of debriefing as a final
element of the experience to consolidate learning (E6).
6.2.3 Prototyping Methods for Tangible Interactions
In the fourth and fifth stage of the Design Thinking cycle, the possible design artifact
or product gets prototyped and tested. As highlighted by the experts, iterating and
testing a prototype with actual end users is one of the most important aspects in the
cycle (E1, E2, E3, E4, E6). Research agrees with this, stating that gathering early user
feedback is essential and highlighting that many existing multi-touch projects miss a
step in the user-centred design process by designing without evaluating the interaction
(de Souza Alcantara, Ferreira, & Maurer, 2013; Derboven, De Roeck, Verstraete,
Geerts, & De Grooff, 2010).
Tobeabletodoso, itiscrucialtounderstandwhichprototypingmethodsarevalid
for tangible tabletops or installations that combine physical and digital interaction.
One low-fidelity technique common in UI Design is paper prototyping. Even
thoughdeSouzaAlcantaraetal.(2013)arguepaperprototypingnottobesufficientwith
non-trivial interactions, they also state it can be used "when the available prototyping
tools do not support the components and ideas which a designer wants to implement"
(de Souza Alcantara et al., 2013).
42
--- Page 43 ---
Paper prototyping can also be combined with other techniques. When working
with capacitive touch, paper can be used to build a physical touch component which
simulatesatouchonthescreen. Onelimitationofthistechniqueisthatallcomponents
have to be attached to the same ground electrode from the screen device and most
devices can handle only up to ten simultaneous touch events. The same article also
suggests a tool called ProtoPie as a software wireframing tool for rapid prototyping.
(Ye, Yong, Han, Yen, & Zheng, 2024)
Other than that, paper can also be combined with a camera that detects fiducial
markers. Coding such detections was suggested by experts as well (E3, E4). Zufferey,
Jermann, Lucchi, and Dillenbourg (2009) use interactive paper, where the users can
place magnets ordraw on single sheets, which the camera can detect as well and make
the simulation react to it.
Another proposed method is Wizard of Oz (E6). Wizard of Oz (WoZ) has the
power of "testing technology that is not yet available or working properly but might be
in the (near) future"(Mast, Roidl, & Jylha, 2023) and therefore opens the possibility
to evaluate interactions before implementing them without having to invest a lot of
resources (Mast et al., 2023). WoZ prototypes replicate a working system through
a human wizard that simulates interaction responses from the system in reaction to
user input(Zhang et al., 2024). However, this method comes with the downsides of a
high cognitive load for the human wizard and not a lot of tools that support it(Mast
et al., 2023). Especially for multi-touch techniques, WoZ can create "problems with
delay or obscured parts of the interface"(Derboven et al., 2010). While Mast et al.
(2023) suggests using Spatial Augmented Reality for tangible interactions, Zhang et
al. (2024) combines physical props with Mixed Reality to "provide realistic touch
experiences in VR" (Zhang et al., 2024).
To test the token design, experts advise to use 3D printing (E2).
6.3 Measuring Techniques
To be able to design a suitable tangible tabletop setup for this use case and model the
interaction correctly, it is important to understand how usability, engagement, and
learning can be measured in this context of use.
6.3.1 Measuring Usability
Literature proposes the System Usability Scale (SUS) to measure and evaluate the
perceivedusabilityofatangibleorinteractivetabletop (deVriesetal.,2021;DaCosta,
Zen, & Tavares, 2024). Da Costa, Zen, and Tavares (2024) also suggest AttrakDiff,
which used to be an online survey but unfortunately is no longer supported as of
January 2025 (AttrakDiff, n.d.).
The SUS is the most widely used questionnaire in UX research and is a post-test
evaluation ofusability. Itisvalidandreliableandconsistsof10Likert-scalequestions
that result in a score of 0 to 100. (Laubheimer, 2025)
It helps to determine the degree to which a product or system is easy to use
and understand, but does not provide insights into the specific difficulties or issues
43
--- Page 44 ---
participants face during the interaction(AlArfaj & Solaiman, 2022). Therefore,
observations, as in Zhang et al. (2024) during the usability tests, or interviews, as in
de Vries et al. (2021) afterwards, are important to explain or support the value of the
measured SUS result.
6.3.2 Measuring Engagement
Engagement can be measured through physiological approaches, such as using an
electroencephalograms (EEGs) to measure brain activity and distinguish between
different affective states, analysing facial expressions or using eye tracking(Lalmas et
al., 2014; Tian, Zhou, & Pelleg, 2021).
For online services, Tian et al. (2021) also list online behaviour metrics such as
the time spent on a webpage. Nevertheless, O’Brien and Toms (2010) argue these
as not valid metrics since spending a long time on a service could also mean the
user is confused about how to interact next instead of being positively engaged in the
interaction.
The most prominently mentioned element of how to measure engagement is self-
reporting (Lalmas et al., 2014; O’Brien & Toms, 2010; Tian et al., 2021). Although
self-report measures are not as objective as performance or physiological measures,
they provide a quick and easy way to evaluate the user’s perspective of an experience
(O’Brien & Toms, 2010).
Self-reporting can be done through the User Engagement Scale or its short form
(UES-SF) (O’Brien, Cairns, & Hall, 2018). It is a reliable and valid scale that focuses
on six factors of engagement: Focused attention, perceived usability, endurability,
novelty, aesthetics, and felt involvement (O’Brien & Toms, 2010).
6.3.3 Measuring Learning
For measuring learning, Fowler (2013) suggests the physiological measure of eye
tracking. This method is based on the fact that cognitive processes are difficult to
assess, but proxy measures, such as eye gaze or blinking, can provide information
about the learning process and what participants are thinking about (Fowler, 2013).
Most research however suggest to measure learning through a pre- and post-test
in form of (quiz) questions(Dicheva & Hodge, 2018; Souropetsis & Kyza, 2025;
Ramnarine-Rieks, 2012; Karjalainen et al., 2021;Guide: How to Effectively Measure
Learning Impact, n.d.).
The pre-testacts as a baseline ofknowledge(Dicheva & Hodge, 2018; Souropetsis
& Kyza, 2025), which gets completed by the participants first. Afterwards, the main
activity, such as playing a game, is being performed, followed by the post-test to
analyse whether the players have improved and retained the knowledge in comparison
to the pre-test(Dicheva & Hodge, 2018;Guide: How to Effectively Measure Learning
Impact, n.d.).
This way, the familiarity and experience with the topic before and after can get
evaluated(Karjalainen et al., 2021). The questions of the pre- and post-test should
be similar to be able to compare them, and they can be asked as online qualitative
44
--- Page 45 ---
survey(Dicheva & Hodge, 2018; Karjalainen et al., 2021). The amount of questions
can vary per research, as Karjalainen et al. (2021) for example asked 1 open-ended
and 4 multiple choice questions, while Tindall et al. (2018) asked their participants to
answer 44 questions.
6.4 Competitive Analysis Findings
As described in 4.4, a competitive analysis matches features with competitors who
incorporate these features. Since the tangible tabletop has on the one side the energy
grid simulation and on the other the interaction with the table and tokens, there will
be two feature comparison matrices. One for the content, so energy grid related
simulation games, and one for the interactions of existing tangible tables.
To compare competitors and list the features, both times the information was
collected in Excel sheets.
6.4.1 Content Feature Analysis
In total, six competitors offering video or app games are in focus: Balancing the
Grid (NESO, n.d.), Power Network Tycoon(David Made This, 2024), Power the Grid
(ClaudioA, n.d.), Power to the People(Rhombico Games, 2022), Idle Energy Tycoon:
Power Grid(OneOrWa, 2024), and one simulation game from 100%FAT(100FAT
B.V., 2023).
An overview of the games’ goals and descriptions can be seen in Appendix E.
In order to analyse and collect data on the energy grid related simulation games,
they were either played or watched tutorials about them.
The collected feature comparison matrix (Figure 10 and Figure 11) consists of
eight identified feature groups. These are ‘used entities’, describing the objects one
can interact with in context of the energy grid, ‘different statistics’, which relates to
the shown numbers and information, the kind of ‘onboarding’ that is available, what
attributes influence the simulation (‘influencing attributes’), how ‘competition’ is
workedin,whatactionscanbeperformedwithorfortheentities(‘actionsforentities’),
what ‘other actions’ are available, and what else is notable (‘other’).
Regarding the ‘used entities’, most games utilise at least solar panels and wind
turbines as renewable energy sources, while some also include hydroelectric plants
with thermal and tidal power, or biomass. The fossil energy sources used are gas,
nuclear or coal-fired power plants. Some add more detail and logic with entities like
substations,conductors,andpoles. Manyalsoincludethebatteriesorstoragefacilities.
Whiletwogames letthe userinteractwithbuildings thatcan receiveenergy, one game
includes one main energy receiving headquarter as well.
All games include money as a statistic or variable that is important for the game
play, and most also work with the balance of demand and supply. Other factors are,
for instance, the peoples’ satisfaction, the amount of people needing energy supply,
the environmental aspect, and the stability of the grid.
To start the game, nearly all offer a tutorial or demo as ‘onboarding’.
45
--- Page 46 ---
Figure 10: Content Competitor Feature Comparison Matrix 1.
Attributes that influence the simulation are for all games new missions, tasks,
challenges or scenarios. Also the weather with information about the wind and sun or
the time are used by most, while some include a day and night cycle or the date.
Regarding ‘competition’, two games include each either leaderboards or per-
sonalised statistics after the game. Others use hearts or lives and let the user gain
points.
As actions for or with the entities, many games let the user connect entities with
linesorupgradethemtoproducemoreenergy. Othersoffertostopordowngradeeither
onlyfossiloralsorenewableenergysourceswhileonealsolettheentitiesproductivity
react to the position the user has chosen for the entity.
Otherpossibleactionsinclude,amongothers,pausingorforwardingthesimulation,
exporting or importing energy, and unlocking new areas on the map or features.
6.4.2 Interaction Feature Analysis
Four different competitors have been analysed for the interaction feature analysis.
These are the tangible tabletops of Smart City by Artific3(currentsnewmedia, 2024),
46
--- Page 47 ---
Figure 11: Content Competitor Feature Comparison Matrix 2.
Interactive Scape(Interactive scape GmbH, n.d.), Reactable(Reactable, 2022), and
Tangible Engine (ideum, n.d.).
The feature comparison matrix (Figure 12) shows that all four tables offer collabo-
ration while one setup works with a second screen.
Only the interactive scope offers to use tokens in the shapes of their functions as
any object can be turned into a token. Similarly, the tangible engine can place any
object on their round tokens and simulate this functionality as well. Again, only the
interactive scope makes it possible to use more than 20 tokens at once. All tables let
their users lift, place, drag and rotate their tokens, while the Reactable also allows to
combine tokens.
47
--- Page 48 ---
Figure 12: Interaction Competitor Feature Comparison Matrix.
48
--- Page 49 ---
7 Defining Target Group and Requirements
In the second phase of the Design Thinking cycle, the main goal is to define the target
group and requirements by understanding the user problems and needs highlighted in
the empathise stage (Gibbons, 2024).
The creation of personas can "help keep efforts human-centered"(Interaction
Design Foundation, 2025b), while a MoSCoW analysis allows for managing user
requirements through categorisation (ProductPlan, 2024).
7.1 Personas
According to Cooper et al. (2014), personas are descriptive models of users based on
research. Through collected behaviours and motivations, it is possible to "develop
an understanding of [the] users’ goals in specific contexts"(Cooper et al., 2014) and
therefore inform the design of a product. The persona’s motivations, in the form of
goals,shouldbebasedonreal-worldobservations,whichmaybeprimaryorsupported
by secondary source data. (Cooper et al., 2014)
Defining the goals is the most important step as the behaviours and motivations of
thepersonaaremoreimportanttothedesignprocessthanthepersona’sdemographics.
The goals can be differentiated into life goals, end goals, and experience goals. This
research will focus on end goals with what the user wants to do during the task
combined with experience goals with what the user aims to feel during the task.
(Cooper et al., 2014)
Created personas can, among other things, help "determine what a product should
do and how it should behave"(Cooper et al., 2014) and support communication
with stakeholders by "provid[ing] common language for discussing design decisions"
(Cooper et al., 2014).
7.1.1 Primary Persona
Per interface only one primary persona can exist(Cooper et al., 2014). Since only
one type of interface and interaction will be designed for this research, also only one
primary persona is needed.
Thechosen primarypersonaissupposedtosatisfyallotherpersonaswithadesign
targeted to their needs. Or, vice versa, any other persona is not dissatisfied with a
design that is targeted to the primary persona. (Cooper et al., 2014)
Based on the stakeholder interviews, the observations during the Co-Designing,
and the literature findings, the designed main persona is Tanja Tangible (Figure 13),
who fulfils the role of a parental facilitatorpersona(Almeshari et al., 2020). Tanja is a
44 years old primary school teacher from Utrecht, the Netherlands. She has two kids
aged 11 and 8. About visiting museums, you can hear her say: "If we leave a museum
knowing even a little bit more than when we came in, and we’ve had fun, then it’s a
win" (Tanja Tangible, Figure 13).
She likes playing board games with her friends and family but dislikes feeling
old when using technology. She has no knowledge about the energy grid and also no
49
--- Page 50 ---
previous experiences with other interactive or tangible tabletops. At home, she uses
her Samsung smartphone with Android operating system a lot and prepares school
material for her lessons on her Acer laptop with Windows as operating system.
Most importantly, her three main goals towards the task of interacting with an
energy grid related tangible tabletop setting are: (1) Having fun playing with physical
objects, the simulation and with her family, (2) feeling drawn in by the scenario of
reaching a specific goal, and (3) feeling in control because she easily understands how
to manipulate the simulation and assess its impact.
Challenges she faces are avoiding to touch installations if she is not sure what
will happen as a reaction, becoming overwhelmed by too many available tokens, and
getting demotivated due to unclear instructions.
Figure 13: Main Persona Tanja Tangible. Photo by Peyman Shojaei on Unsplash.
50
--- Page 51 ---
7.1.2 Negative Persona
A negative persona, or also called anti persona, is a type of user for whom the product
is specifically not designed for (Cooper et al., 2014).
In this use case, the negative persona is identified as Peter Professional (Figure
14), who is a type of Professional/Hobbyist persona(Almeshari et al., 2020). Peter is
a 28 year old single Energy Systems Researcher living and working in Eindhoven,
the Netherlands. His point of view about visiting museums is: "I like when museums
take the subject seriously and teach me the real mechanics behind a concept." (Peter
Professional, Figure 14)
He likes technology and playing computer games with his friends but does not
appreciatebeingtalkeddownto. Duetohisstudiesandwork,hehasalotofknowledge
about the energy grid and has also tested and seen multiple interactive and tangible
tabletop research projects from his fellow researchers. Peter uses his smartphone,
tablet and laptop daily and likes to wear his smartwatch, which are all Apple products
running on iOS.
His goals towards the task of interacting with an energy grid related tangible
tabletop setting are to feel challenged learning more about his profession from a
different perspective, feeling appreciated playing with a real life simulation of his
work, and feeling in power by being able to show off and get the best ranking at the
end of the interaction.
However, he gets easily bored if the learning content is too basic or overly guided,
wants detailed data or control during the simulation, and expects a high accuracy to
the real world.
7.2 MoSCoW Analysis
A MoSCoW analysis helps ranking and categorising requirements based on their
significance and importance. The four available categories are ‘must have’, ‘should
have’, ‘could have’ and ‘will not have’. ‘Must have’ requirements are those that are
essential to the product, ‘should have’ requirements add a considerable amount of
value, ‘could have’ requirements are nice to have, and ‘will not have’ requirements
are not targeted in this timeframe as they are not considered feasible at this time.
Therefore, each requirement needs to be assessed based on the available resources and
its importance towards the product. (ProductPlan, 2024)
Based on the empathising stage and the primary persona’s goals, all requirements
are noted and categorised into one of the four groups.
For an intuitive, engaging, and educational interaction of a large number of tokens
on a tangible tabletop, the setting must have the requirements listed in Figure 15,
should have the requirements listed in Figure 16, could have the requirements listed in
Figure 17, and will not have this time the requirements listed in Figure 18.
One of the must have requirements is a reasonable size of the tokens. To calculate
this, it was kept in mind that the interface has to stay visible to allow, for example,
for Nielsen’s heuristic of ‘Visibility of System Status’(Nielsen, 2024a). Therefore, it
is assumed that at least 60% of the screen has to stay visible when all 20 tokens are
51
--- Page 52 ---
Figure 14: Negative Persona Peter Professional. Photo by Samuel Raita on Unsplash.
placed. Basedon the available 55-inchscreen that100%FAT provides, this means that
each token can occupy a maximum area of 165,56cm². To explain this on two specific
forms as examples, with a circle as a base, the token can have a maximum rounded
diameter of 14,5cm or with a square as base a maximum rounded side of 12,9cm.
52
--- Page 53 ---
Figure 15: Must Have Requirements.
Figure 16: Should Have Requirements
53
--- Page 54 ---
Figure 17: Could Have Requirements.
Figure 18: Will Not Have Requirements.
54
--- Page 55 ---
8 Ideating Design Solutions
In the third stage of the Design Thinking cycle, the aim is to utilise all previous
knowledge and ideate as many different creative design solutions for the identified
user need (Gibbons, 2024).
8.1 Ideation Methods
Three ideation methods were chosen to support this process: Bodystorming and rough
prototyping from the Empathise stage to gain initial insights into how users expect the
game to look; the morphological chart to ideate broadly, which is easily adaptable to
be performed by one person; and storyboarding to develop selected ideas further.
8.1.1 Bodystorming & Rough Prototyping
During the stakeholder Co-Design sessions, the techniques of bodystorming and
rough prototyping were used (4.3.2). While the stakeholders communicated their
expectations, they also ideated on possible simulation games, which can be utilised at
this stage of the process.
All created tabletop designs and setups can be seen in Figure 19.
Almost all stakeholders incorporate the idea of visible power lines that can be
connected to energy consuming buildings or just the grid itself through touch by
dragging the finger from one entity to the other. Other popular ideas include the
placement of tokens that affect the simulation, and different scenarios that provide
incentives for the player to complete a mission.
Most also imagine a cycle of day and night, different demanders and suppliers,
and the happiness of the people who live in the city that is being energised.
Somelikeasetupthatissimilartothepopularsimulation games‘Cities: Skylines’
(ColossalOrderLtd.,2015)or‘SimCity’(ElectronicArts,2013),whileothersenvision
a landscape as the underlying simulation.
With a few mentions, some ideate a clock being displayed and having different
citiesintheNetherlandstochoosefrom. Thepossibilityforthecablestooverload,cost
efficiency being the ultimate goal, and the demanding facilities being only digital and
notphysicaltokensarecreatedconceptsaswell,alongwithideassuchasincorporating
different voltage grids and having to reach a certain balance.
Multiple other ideas that come up only once per stakeholder are, for instance,
being able to ask for tips, having the demanding facilities in the middle of the table,
being able to use physical wires, and the power lines connecting entities appearing
by themselves. Moreover, participants propose animations of the power connections
displayingtheamountofflowingenergy,havingthedemandingfacilitieschangecolour
based on their energy receiving status, and including real-world physical appliances,
such as coffee machines that only work if the energy grid simulation is fixed.
55
--- Page 56 ---
Figure 19: Created Tables in Co-Design Sessions.
8.1.2 Morphological Chart
Based on Digital Society School (n.d.), a morphological chart is a method where a
design problem gets split into smaller parts and each part gets solutions ideated for.
The different solutions can then be combined in numerous ways, which results in
56
--- Page 57 ---
various concept ideas.
To use this method successfully, a clear design problem must be defined. Then,
all tasks and subtasks that are needed to solve the design problem are listed in one
column. Afterwards, it is supposed to draw how each task or subtask could be solved
in as many creative and different ways as possible. Concepts can then be created by
combining these different design solutions. After filtering the best concepts, the top
three ones get sketched. (Digital Society School, n.d.)
To formulate a suitable design problem, it can be phrased as a How Might We
question. A How Might We question "allows [...] to reframe and open up [...] problem
statementsforefficient,targetedandinnovativeideationsessions"intheformof "‘How
might we’ + Intended Action (as an action verb) + ‘for’ + Potential User (as the
subject) + ‘so that’ + Desired Outcome"(Interaction Design Foundation, 2024b).
By applying this framework, the following How Might We question acts as a base
for the morphological chart: How might we create a tangible tabletop experience with
20 tokens for museum visitors so that they can intuitively interact, engage with the
simulation, and learn about the energy grid?
Afternotingdownalltasksandsubtasks,suchas"Decideonoverallgoal","Design
placementoftokens",and"Whatkindoftokens",differentdesignsolutionaresketched
as seen in Figure 20.
Figure 20: Morphological Charts
By combining the different solutions, five concepts are created, which are iterated
to three final concept outcomes of this ideation method.
Concept1(Figure21)showsafixedenergygridwithplaceholdersforsupplytokens.
The available supply tokens are placed around the table and grouped accordingly. The
simulation has the overall goal of gaining as many coins as possible while balancing
the supply and demand of energy from one city for two minutes. Placed supply tokens
57
--- Page 58 ---
generate energy which flows to the main city and gains the player coins. However,
placing and keeping supply objects costs coins as well. At the meantime, the demand
shifts based on peak hours and different supply tokens provide different amount of
energy based on their positioning.
Figure 21: Morphological Chart: Concept 1.
Concept 2 (Figure 22) shows different locked and unlocked landmarks. On the left
bucket, supply tokens are stored while the right one contains energy demanding house
tokens. The overall goal is to connect all ten house tokens to the energy supply by
connecting energy landmarks to city landmarks. Solving missions gains the player
points with which they can unlock further areas.
Concept 3 (Figure 23) aims at energising 200.000 people by keeping the grid
frequencyas constantlyas possible at50Hz. To do so, the energysupplying tokens are
stored in tubes and can be placed on their corresponding landmarks. Digital houses
that either light up or are disabled around the landmarks show how many are already
energised and how many still need to be.
These concepts are taken as a base for the next ideation method: Storyboarding.
8.1.3 Storyboarding & MoSCoW Requirements Matching
A storyboard is an essential method in the ideation phase and visually shows how a
user interacts with a product by communicating a story through images(Sosebashvili,
2025; Krause, 2024).
Storyboards consist of a scenario in which the persona is in, visuals displaying the
story and captions describing the visuals. The visuals do not need to be high quality
drawings, instead stick figures or simple sketches are fine as long as they show what
wants to be conveyed. (Krause, 2024).
58
--- Page 59 ---
Figure 22: Morphological Chart: Concept 2.
Figure 23: Morphological Chart: Concept 3.
Atthisstage,thestoryboardsarebasedonthethreeconceptsfromthemorphological
chart method and visualise more in detail how Tanja Tangible interacts with them.
Additionally, they can get checked in how well they match the previously defined
requirements from the MoSCoW analysis (7.2).
The first page of each concept is shown in Figure 24, 25 and Figure 26, while the
full storyboards can be seen in Appendix F.
59
--- Page 60 ---
Figure 24: Storyboard A, Page 1 of 5.
To measure how well the concepts and storyboards fulfil the set requirements, a
weighted table lists all requirements, their category within the MoSCoW spectrum,
their weight, and the storyboards A, B, and C.
For the weighting, ‘must’ requirements are being weighted with 3, ‘should’ with
2, ‘could’ with 1 and ‘will not’ with 0, while each concept can fulfil a requirement
either with 1, meaning fully fulfilled, 0.5, meaning partially fulfilled, or 0, meaning
not fulfilled.
ThefilledtablecanbeseeninAppendixG,withthefinalscoreindicatinghowwell
eachconceptmeetstherequirements. StoryboardAachievedascoreof44,storyboard
B a score of 49, and storyboard C a score of 39. While all three are relatively close to
each other, storyboard B therefore fulfils the requirements the best.
However, it is lacking in various aspects where A and/or C achieved a better rank.
Hence, the final concept will be build on concept B but take on aspects from A and C
as well.
8.2 Final Concept
The final concept idea (Figure 27) is based on concept B, but with four changes:
Support of a common central area right from the beginning, token placement as in
storyboard A, a different token design, and gaining coins instead of points.
The setup places all tokens in holders around three sides of the tabletop, while the
screen is being placed closely on the forth long side.
60
--- Page 61 ---
Figure 25: Storyboard B, Page 1 of 5.
The tokens are divided in supply and demand tokens. The supply tokens are half
fossil and half renewable energy sources: Two nuclear power plants, two coal-fired
power plants, and one gas-fired power plant as fossil energy sources, together with
two solar panels, two wind turbines, and one hydroelectric plant as renewable energy
sources. The demand tokens are ten tokens embodying houses.
To encourage lifting and grabbing of the round tokens, as well as a sturdy token
design, the object that the token represents should be embossed on top of or, if a
Plexiglas tube outer wall is possible, placed inside the token.
Toincorporatesignifiers,thematerial,whichthesuppliersneedtogenerateenergy,
shouldbeusedandrepeatedasicons,suchasonthetokenitself,ontheirplaceholders,
and on the area the player is allowed to place them on.
Theinterfaceofthetableshowsvariouslandmarks. Landmarkscanhavethestates
of being locked or unlocked. If they are locked, a number indicates how many coins
are needed to unlock it. Some of the landmarks have the mentioned icons attached
to them, which signifies that only this kind of supply object can be placed there. For
example, a sun icon indicates only solar panels can be placed in this area. Landmarks
with no material icon have fictional names of cities and represent areas, where house
tokens can be placed.
At the beginning, one big city area in the middle of the screen is unlocked and
depicts an animated circle placeholder for a house token. The second screen depicts a
catchy Call to Action (CTA), such as "Can you power every city?". Placing a token
correctly emits particles, while removing one shows a ring moving inwards. When a
61
--- Page 62 ---
Figure 26: Storyboard C, Page 1 of 5.
house token is placed on a free spot, the second screen shows how many houses have
already been connected with energy, how many coins the player(s) have gained, and
what mission can be fulfilled to gain coins.
If a city has a house placed but not enough energy flowing towards it, it lights up
in a warning colour. Energy supply areas that are then needed to be connected to the
city can be unlocked by spending coins. The game play prescribes which area can
be unlocked at what time due to the coins one can gather until then. Once an energy
supply area is unlocked, the suitable energy supply tokens can be placed there. After
this happens for the first time, an animation will visualise that the user has to drag a
line from the energy supply area to the city, which will draw a connection line. An
animation along the connection line will visualise how much energy is flowing to the
connected city.
Different scenarios, such as wind changes, stronger or weaker currents or clouds
blocking the sun, will affect how well renewable energy sources work and how much
fossil fuel is needed.
The general goal of the simulation is to connect all houses successfully to energy.
62
--- Page 63 ---
Figure 27: Final Concept Idea.
63
--- Page 64 ---
9 Prototyping and Testing Tangible Interactions
The fourth and fifth stage of the Design Thinking cycle suggest to prototype chosen
ideas to understand how well they work and if they are feasible, as well as test these
prototypes by "[r]eturn[ing] to your users for feedback" (Gibbons, 2024).
The different stages of prototyping include low- and high-fidelity prototyping.
Low-fidelity prototypes help define the concept of the product and can be done,
for example, through paper prototypes or digital sketches. High-fidelity prototypes
have the look and feel of a polished product which "can be created as a high-quality
interactive prototype" (Shuhalii, 2021).
9.1 Low-Fidelity Prototyping: Paper & Sketching
As mentioned in 6.2.3, paper prototyping is a method that can be used for a tangible
tabletop setup.
Based on this, the low-fidelity (low-fi) prototype is created by digitally sketching
the interfaces of both the tablet UI and the second screen UI using Procreate on a
tablet. Paper cups, Post-its and markers are also used to prototype the tokens and their
placement.
All sketches can be seen in Appendix H, while the setup and testing of the low-fi
prototype can be seen in Figure 28.
It is also considered whether active instead of passive tokens would benefit the
setup. The active tokens could have LED lights on top (represented by coloured paper
pieces on top of the paper cups) and physical buttons on the paper cups that can be
pressed to log in a placement (Figure 29). However, neither addition seems to add
enough value to justify adding these functionalities to the prototype. As they are not
considered ‘must’ priorities in the requirements either, they are disregarded.
Testing the low-fi prototype sketches on the tabletop and second screen reveals a
few minorlogic issues. Forexample, notenough coins are deducted when unlocking a
new energy-supplying area. It is also revealed that all areas should be smaller and that
the tokens should be placed closer together to enhance the feeling of grouping and
provide a clearer overview despite the number of objects. Additionally, to increase
recognisability and avoid confusion, the UI on the second screen should be changed
to display the houses using the same house icon shown on the table. Regarding the
token design of the energy suppliers, it seems more natural to emboss the icon of the
needed material on top (such as a sun icon for the solar panel tokens) as this improves
the usage of signifiers by using the material icons on the UI placeholders as well.
Therefore, the icon of the object representing the token should be embossed on its
sides (such as the actual solar panel icon on the sides of the solar panel tokens).
9.2 High-Fidelity Prototyping
Basedonthefindingsoftestingthelow-fiprototype,thehigh-fidelity(high-fi)prototype
should be highly interactive and have a polished look and feel.
64
--- Page 65 ---
Figure 28: Testing Low-Fi Setup.
Taking into account the game’s features, the time restrictions for building the
prototype, andthelimitations ofcommon design tools, itisdecidedtocreate aWizard
of Oz (WoZ) prototype as proposed as a suitable method in 6.2.3. As mentioned, this
type ofprototype pretends to be a machine operating system, butin reality, some ofits
functions are controlled by a human operator (Rosala, 2024).
65
--- Page 66 ---
Figure 29: Testing Active Tokens.
9.2.1 UI Design and Interaction for Tabletop and Second Screen
To design the user interfaces of the tabletop and the second screen, it is needed to
design each table screen based on the low-fi sketches in Figma, which can then be
imported in ProtoPie to add high-fidelity (WoZ) interactions(Figma, n.d.; ProtoPie,
n.d.-b).
The goal for the design language is to communicate a clean and aesthetic design
with clear colour coding, all while maintaining an attractive gaming look and feel.
While the chosen colours and their attached meaning can be seen in Appendix I,
‘Lexend’ is decided to be used as a font(Fonts, n.d.). This sans-serif font reaches the
right balance between a playful but serious aesthetic and a friendly one thanks to its
high x-height.
The base of the underlying background image, a grass field with trees and a river
in the top left corner is prompted in and generated by ChatGPT’s image generator
(ChatGPT, n.d.). Photoshop is used to cut and copy the trees into the exact position
(Adobe, n.d.).
To create each screen based on the low-fi prototype sketches (Appendix H),
components are being built in Figma to enable the reuse of elements such as icons,
cities and missions.
After designing all screens, they get imported into ProtoPie, which supports
cross-device interaction between different ProtoPie files, so-called Pies, through
ProtoPie Connect and therefore is ideal for having the tabletop and second screen UI
communicate and react to each other(ProtoPie, n.d.-b, n.d.-a). By opening ProtoPie
Connect on the computer that is connected with the tangible tabletop and the second
screen, both Pies can be launched in the web and send and receive interaction triggers.
As the tangible tabletop that 100%FAT provides has an underlying Duplex system
66
--- Page 67 ---
that cannot detect and react to 20 tokens, this interaction has to be implemented
through WoZ. This is done through the ‘Key’ trigger in ProtoPie, which allows for
actions to happen as a reaction to a key being pressed on a keyboard. This opens up
the possibility of connecting a Bluetooth keyboard, on which keys can be pressed
from a distance to the table without the person interacting with the prototype noticing.
Whenever a token is placed on the table, pressing the key ‘A’ by the wizard can trigger
the correct reaction.
Additionally, ProtoPie allows LottieFiles to be included, with which JSON file
animations can be incorporated(LottieFiles, n.d.). Therefore, self-made animations in
Figma can be exported as a JSON file through the LottieFiles plugin and imported
into ProtoPie, as well as available animations uploaded on the LottieFiles platform by
other users can be downloaded as a JSON file and imported into ProtoPie. Adding
these animations enhances and elevates the design and experience.
In the example seen in Figure 30, four houses have already been placed in Super
City, two wind mills in the wind area, two solar panels in the solar area, and two
coal-fired power plants in the coal area. In the wind area, four wind animations power
the wind turbines, while the sun animation powers the solar panels in the sun area. All
three energy supplying areas have been successfully connected to Super City which is
why the four houses get sufficiently energised. 50 coins have already been gained by
solving previous missions, while the next mission asks to build three more houses and
supply Super City and Tiny City fully with energy, while the water area in the top left
corner is ready to be unlocked.
9.2.2 3D Printing for Tokens and Placeholders
3D modelling and printing are used to design and create the tokens and their place-
holders.
The models are designed in Autodesk Fusion by creating a simple cylinder with a
7cm diameter and 10cm height(Autodesk, n.d.). The same icons seen on the tabletop
areextrudedon topofthecylinders, suchasa sun fortokensrepresentingsolarpanels,
a coal cart for tokens representing coal-fired power plants and a house for tokens
representing energy consumers. All energy suppliers also have their representative
building slightly extruded on the sides.
The placeholders are designed with holes for the tokens to be placed on, which
have the icon of the respecting token reverse extruded. Labels on the top describe
the category (‘Energy consumers’, ‘Fossil power plants’ or ‘Renewable energies’),
and show the icon and name of each token group. For example, a sun icon with the
description ‘Solar panels’ is written above the two solar panel tokens.
All models are printed and attached to the tabletop by 100%FAT. The energy
consumers are printed with a light green base colour and a dark green icon colour, the
energy suppliers on the other hand with a blue base colour and a dark blue icon colour
to match the colour coding of the UI (Appendix J).
67
--- Page 68 ---
Figure 30: Example of ProtoPie Pies.
9.2.3 Final Setup
The final setup of the prototype installation consists of the tabletop interface and the
second screen each running their designated Pie, and the printed tokens being placed
in their respective placeholders around the table (Figure 31).
To see how the step by step interaction with the final high fidelity prototype setup
works, please see Appendix K.
9.3 Usability Study
To test whether the installation allows for a usable and engaging interaction that also
supports the defined degree of learning, a usability study is conducted.
68
--- Page 69 ---
Figure 31: Final Setup Prototype Installation.
9.3.1 Setup
To prepare for this study, documents including a participant information sheet (Ap-
pendix L) and a consent form (Appendix M), the SUS for measuring usability as
suggested in 6.3.1 (Appendix N) and the UES-SF for measuring engagement as
suggested in 6.3.2 (Appendix O), as well as a general guideline with quiz questions
for measuring learning as suggested in 6.3.3 and probing further into usability and
engagement(AppendixP)areprepared. WhiletheSUSquestionnairehaditsquestions
alwaysinthesameorder,thequestionsoftheUES-SFwererandomisedperparticipant
69
--- Page 70 ---
and dimension identifiers were removed(Dissemination Implementation Models
in Health, n.d.). This research procedure was checked and approved by the ethical
committee of Computer & Information Sciences (CIS) from the University of Twente
under RP 250163.
Thein-personusabilitystudyusestheWoZprototypebycombiningsemi-structured
pre-interviews, an observation while the participants interact with the installation,
and post-study questionnaires and interviews to measure usability, engagement, and
learning. While at all steps audio is being recorded by phone, the observation is also
video-recorded by camera to take written notes afterwards.
The setup is presented in Figure 32, with the camera filming the participant
interactingwiththeinstallationandthetestadministratorasthehumanwizardstanding
next to the Bluetooth keyboard.
Figure 32: Testing Setup.
9.3.2 Participants
In total, five usability study sessions are being scheduled. Test participants are being
screened by asking them whether they like to go to museums sometimes, if they are
not too technical in terms of programming, and whether they have a deep knowledge
ofthe energygrid. In case the answers are two times yes andonce no, theygetinvited.
To recruit suitable candidates, again convenience sampling is being used by
reaching outto artists in the same building as 100%FAT andthe author’s own network
(Baxter et al., 2015).
The sessions are scheduled for one hour.
70
--- Page 71 ---
9.3.3 Analysis Method
To analyse the interviews, Taylor-Powell and Renner (2003)’s approach gets used
which was already applied forthe analysis of the expert and userinterviews during the
empathise stage as introduced in 4.3.4. Firstly, the data is familiarised with before
organising it by question. A table is created for the educational quiz questions to
compare each participant’s answers to each question before and after the interaction.
The document with the sorted data is then imported into Atlas.ti(ATLAS.ti Scientific
Software Development GmbH, 2025). To code and categorise the information,
emergent categories are used, which then get imported into Miro(Miro, 2025) to
identify patterns and for being interpreted.
To analyse the SUS, a spreadsheet was prepared in which the rankings of all
participants were copied. As explained by Thomas (2019), each of the odd numbered
questions got 1 subtracted from their score, and for even numbered questions their
value was subtracted from 5. Per participant, their ten resulting values got summed up
andmultipliedby2.5. TocalculatetheoverallSUSscore,thescoresofeachparticipant
were summed up and divided by 5.
To analyse the UES-SF, all results were imported into a prepared spreadsheet as
wellandsortedbasedontheirdimensionidentifiers. Tocalculatethescoresforeachof
the 4 dimensions of ‘Focused Attention’, ‘Perceived Usability’, ‘Aesthetic Elements’,
and ‘Reward Factor’, they were summed up and divided by 3, since each dimension
has 3 items. For ‘Perceived Usability’, its 3 items were reverse-coded. The overall
UES-SF score was calculated by firstly adding all items together per participant and
dividing this sum by 12. Afterwards, the scores of each participant were summed up
and divided by 5. (Dissemination Implementation Models in Health, n.d.)
9.3.4 Results
Regarding the demographics of the participants, two are aged between 35 and 44, two
between 55 and 65, and one above 65 years, with three identifying as women and two
as men. Most of the participants are artists, while one has the occupation of being an
interaction designer and one being a medical specialist. Apart from one participant,
who is from Germany, all are from the Netherlands.
On average, participants spent around 14 minutes interacting with the installation.
P1 spent the longest time with around 18 minutes, while P3 spent the shortest time at
around 9 minutes.
To understand the educational value of the prototype, four open questions are
asked prior to and post to the interaction. One participant (P3) had a large pre-
knowledge regarding the term ‘electricity mix’ or ‘power-generation mix’, while two
(P2, P4) had none and the other two (P1, P5) had a misunderstanding of the term.
Afterwards however, three participants (P2, P4, P5) showed a learning effect, which
was especially the case for those with no pre-knowledge. For example, when asked
about their understanding of this term, P4 answered "I really don’t know", while after
the interaction they answered "Better than before. I know what it is" and when asked
to describe it, they answered "To use different sources for power".
71
--- Page 72 ---
Regardingtheenergysourcesthatcanbeusedtogenerateelectricity,allparticipants
had a solid understanding of most of the common source types. Nevertheless, P1, P2,
and P5 could improve their knowledge by remembering one or two sources more after
the interaction. P1 recalled solar panels, whereas P2 and P5 remembered coal- and
gas-fired power stations.
Before the interaction, all participants explained very well the reasons why it is
beneficial for a city to get electricity from more than one source. However, also here,
three participants (P2, P4, P5) developed a better understanding or learned another
reason why more sources are necessary. P2 explained before the interaction "Probably
becauseoneischeaperoreasieraccessible",whileaftertheinteractiontheymentioned
"Because [the city] doesn’t want to use only fossil. It’s more reliable if you have two
sources, [for example] at night if there is not a lot of solar power".
After the interaction, two participants (P2, P5) developed a slightly higher interest
in learning about the energy grid in the future, as P5 mentioned: "[I am] more
interested, because we see how enormous[ly] important it is".
Regardingtheusability,theSUSrevealsascoreof67inaverage,whiletheUES-SF
targeting the engagement scored a mean of 4.0 (on a 5-point scale) (Appendix Q).
Breaking it down, its four sub-categories received the following means: ‘Focused
Attention’a3.3,‘PerceivedUsability’a3.9,andboth‘AestheticElements’and‘Reward
Factor’ a 4.3.
Justificationsofthesescorescanbefoundintheobservationsduringtheinteraction
as well as through the post-interaction interviews.
What stood out most during the interactions were the various situations in which
participants were confused and got stuck on how to continue. In total, 26 of these
situations were noted across all five sessions. These covered, for example, not
understanding how to start the interaction (P4: "I really don’t know what to do"),
being confused about having to drag and move the wind mill tokens towards the wind
animations (P2 when not understanding to drag them upwards to generate renewable
energy: "Hm, what can I do now?"), not understanding a mission due to its wording
or design (P5 thinking "Unlock Tiny City" is not the reward of the mission but what
they have to interact with now), not seeing or noticing an area to unlock (P1 needing a
hint to find the coal area behind the houses), or not understanding the need to tap the
lock of an area with their finger to unlock it (P1 stating "I can’t make out what this is
meaning" while watching the visual hint to click on the lock icon of the wind area, or
P2 asking themselves "I have to touch this?" after already placing a solar token on the
sun area before unlocking that area by tapping the lock icon).
Due to these confusions, in total 18 hints from the human wizard were needed to
continue the interaction. Forexample, hinting at "Is there anotherenergy area that you
could connect the Tiny City with, that is already on the table?" helped P4 stating “Oh,
yes, I can connect this one!” and connecting the solar panels correctly with Tiny City.
However, the interaction rules were also learned by the participants through trial
and errorduring the interaction. In total, 14 of learned actions happened and recurred.
For example, P1 had to get the first dragging hint explained of how to connect an
energy supply area with an energy demanding city by dragging their finger along
the table, but when seeing it the second time for connecting the solar panels with
72
--- Page 73 ---
Super City they understood it and performed the dragging action themselves. Another
example is P3, who placed both the wind and solar tokens on their respective areas
before unlocking them but learned for the third supplying area, coal, to first tap the
icon to unlock it before placing the tokens.
Other than that, confusion also arose due to limitations caused by bugs in the
prototype. 9 times, the table did not respond to the participant’s input, such as tapping
the screen (P1, P2, P3, P4, P5). Also, one error in the prototype happened for both
P1 an P2 were Tiny City was automatically connected with the solar panels area.
Additionally, the human wizard made a mistake once by clicking the ‘A’ key too
quickly for P3.
Moreover,P5wassmallerinheightandexperiencedissuesinreachingthefarback
coal area.
Nevertheless, multiple participants stated positive reactions or feedback during or
at the end of the interaction. P4 mentioned "Oh wow happy cities haha" when moving
the wind tokens towards the wind animations which turned the sad cities green again,
while P2 said "It is nice, wow, you did great work!" after finishing.
At the end of the interaction, all participants placed the tokens back into their
placeholders without any issues by linking the icons on the tokens with those on the
placeholders.
To probe further about their experience in the post-interviews, participants men-
tioned that their overall impression related to understanding that it is a learning by
doing approach (P1, P2, P5), as P1 for example stated: "After using it for some time it
becomes clear what the meaning is", but P2, P4, and P5 also appreciated the design
and looks "because it looks really cool" (P2), as well as that it was "like a puzzle" (P2)
game that included logic.
All participants would recommend the prototype to others due to it being a fun
and rewarding interaction that seems suitable for every age group, as P5 explained:
"It’s rewarding that it’s logical, I like logics. [...] And at the end you get the flags and
the hurray thing [...] and I think children can use [the system], too, or youngsters or
maybe older people".
There are no issues noted with the amount of tokens, as all of them rated it as
good. During the interaction, many also resorted to bimanual interaction by grabbing
tokens with both hands and placing them at the same time (P1, P2, P3, P4, P5) or
grabbing two tokens at the same time and dragging both simultaneously along the
table (P2, P4). However, P3 mentioned how the dragging of the wind tokens did not
seem intuitive to them ("Why should I move them and not place more [wind mills]
because in the real world you would also not do that") and P1 that the table UI "could
respon[d] quicker".
P1, P2, and P4 enjoyed the visual feedback of a correct interaction, such as P4
mentioning "When something red turns into green, then, ah, I did something good",
while P3 and P5 especially highlighted the flow of the main game play once it was
learned, as P3 stated "to build [the game] up".
However, participants felt stuck when they did not have enough hints or clearance
or when an interaction they wanted to perform was not allowed by the system, such as
dragging an energy connection line through the woods and being stopped by a red X
73
--- Page 74 ---
(P3, P5), as P5 explained: "There was a hiccup when I wanted to draw from the right
upper side but I was blocked by the bushes".
SincethefirstimpressionoftheinstallationincludedforP1andP4anunclearstart
(P1: Howtostart"wasn’tdirectlyclear")togetherwiththemomentsofbeingstuck,P1
andP5wouldwishforbetterexplanationsandhints(P5: "Whatdoesthemachinewant
fromme"). P3wouldappreciate"colourcodingofthetokens"differentiatedintofossil
and renewable coloured tokens, while P2 would like the lock design to be changed
and signify clearer that it can be pressed by being "more like a button". P4 would
also wish for more space around the table so "that you can walk around", while P5
wants a tiltedtabletop "because it is faraway to reach". Moreover, a timerorany other
indication of how long the interaction takes would be beneficial for P5 "that you know
how much time it will take", while P1 suggests to rather use such an installation in a
museum with a technical context so "the public that is going there can use it better".
9.3.5 Analysis
Based on the results, the following analyses the educational value, level of usability,
and engagement of the prototype.
Regarding the first mentioned variable, education, it can be analysed that the
learning effect depends on the pre-knowledge the user has about the energy grid. With
a smaller pre-knowledge, a learning effect can be taken from the installation, such
as specific energy source types, or what exactly an electricity mix is and reasons as
to why it is needed. Additionally, the installation could not improve the interest or
motivation in the topic for all participants.
Since the SUS result with 67 is just below the 50th percentile of 68, it defines that
the score is slightly below average and the usability can be described as "OK", as seen
in Figure 33. (Sauro, 2018)
Figure 33: Average SUS Score based on Sauro (2018).
An analysis of item-level responses on the SUS revealed that Item 1 (‘I think that
I would like to use this system frequently’) consistently received the lowest scores
relative to its ideal response of 5. On average, responses to Item 1 were 2.4 points
below the ideal, whereas all other items deviated by only 0.8 to 1.6 points. This
suggests a disproportionate influence of Item 1 on the overall SUS score, which
potentially skews the results negatively since frequent use of this installation is not
desired in the same way as it might be for, e.g., a smartphone app. As such, this can
74
--- Page 75 ---
be kept in mind when interpreting the SUS result. Moreover, another key point to
consider is that it is not only the usability of the game itself that is tested and rated as
it would be for a smartphone app, but also this new kind of interaction medium of a
tangible tabletop, which influences the experience.
Regarding the level of engagement, the UES-SF scored above neutral with its
overallmeanof4.0,whichshowsthatthesystemwasgenerallyengaging. Thedifferent
category scores help to understand what parts of the experience influenced this result.
The scores for ‘Aesthetic Elements’ and ‘Reward Factor’ were quite high. This
suggests that participants liked the visual design of the system and felt that using it
was enjoyable and worth their time, which was also mentioned by the participants
themselves. ‘Perceived Usability’ also scored fairly high at 3.9, which means that
most participants found the system easy to use, although there are still usability
problems, as indicated by the SUS, observed during the interactions and explained by
the participants during the interviews. ‘Focused Attention’ scored lower compared to
the other categories. This may mean that some participants found it hard to stay fully
focused while interacting with the installation, or they experienced some distractions.
Observing the participants in their interaction with the WoZ prototype together
with the post-interviews gives clear identification of what can be changed and adapted
to help users stay focused during the task and elevate the usability, which can then
influence engagement as well.
Above all, moments of confusion during the interaction must be avoided to keep
theusers’attentionandimproveusability. Thesemomentshighlightalackofguidance
and clarity in the experience. Therefore, the existing tutorialisation has not proven
sufficient and needs to be enhanced. This is particularly true at the beginning of the
interaction, when a new action is introduced, such as clicking, dragging or connecting
two energy suppliers with the same demanding city, and when the user gets stuck.
Addressing these moments and supporting the user with more guidance will improve
and retain the learnability of the interface during the interaction as well as improve
how absorbed one feels in this experience.
Regarding the token design, a stronger grabbing affordance might support a better
understanding of how to start the interaction as well. Nevertheless, the observations
have shown that no participant experienced problems with lifting, placing or dragging
the tokens, and bimanual interaction of using both hands to grab or drag the objects
was supported. Additionally, the amount of tokens was never criticised. This
indicates that introducing the tokens gradually, making them part of the game’s goals,
limiting their functionality, and grouping them visually on the tabletop resulted in no
overwhelmingness.
However, this process of gradually introducing the tokens together with the
moments of confusion resulted in a longer game play. With 14 minutes on average,
this was way above the 2 minute mark that was set for a typical museum participant to
spent time interacting with a museum installation. This could also be a contributing
reason why users lost themselves less in this experience.
Other than that, all participants noticed the second screen and were able to react
and interact based on its content. Nevertheless, it is important to provide clearer
wording of the missions and goals, and to visualise what can be achieved with the
75
--- Page 76 ---
missionandwhichelementsarepartofittoimprovetheinteractionflow. Additionally,
indication of the duration of the installation should be included.
Lastly,thetable’sreachshouldbeimprovedtoaccommodatedifferentbodyheights
and support movement.
76
--- Page 77 ---
10 Discussion
This section discusses the key findings and insights by answering the main research
question, addressing the limitations and lessons learned throughout the work, along
with presenting the future work.
10.1 Key Findings and Insights
To understand how interaction with a large number of physical tokens as part of a
tangible tabletop can be effectively designed to optimise usability, engagement, and
learning in an interactive energy simulation, the Design Thinking and Co-Design
frameworks were applied to develop a WoZ tangible tabletop game. This setup
included twenty 3D-printed tokens and two high-fidelity ProtoPie files for playful
explorationoftheenergygrid. Itwasevaluatedwithfiveparticipantsthroughusability
tests, using the SUS questionnaire for usability, the UES-SF for engagement, and pre-
and post-interaction quiz questions to measure learning.
The results indicate that the interaction design helped players to avoid feeling
overwhelmed by the number of tokens. This may have been achieved through a
simple underlying gameplay concept, gradual introduction of tokens, and the use of
dedicated placeholders on the tabletop interface which also closely grouped related
tokens. Limiting the functionality of tokens to place or drag them in dedicated areas
also contributed. However, despite these design choices, participants still reported
challenges with usability, which was reflected in the just about acceptable SUS score.
Some aspects of engagement, such as aesthetic appeal and rewarding interaction, were
rated positively. However, perceived usability and focused attention were rated lower,
as shown in the UES-SF scores. Overall, learning effects were limited. Some users
with little prior knowledge remembered, for example, specific power source types, but
most did not develop a deeper interest in the topic of the energy grid.
Usability was especially affected by moments of confusion. This suggests a need
for stronger tutorialisation and better learnability. Reducing these confusing moments
could also help increase focused attention and improve the flow of interaction. This
might also increase the educational value, especially if the focused attention is more
closely tied to learning goals. The lack of increased interest in the energy topic could
be because the gameplay was simple and not clearly connected to real-world concepts.
However,thissimplicitywasintentionalduetothemuseumcontextandthepreferences
of the identified main persona. In addition, it likely also helped prevent players from
feeling overwhelmed by the number of tokens.
The slightly below-average but still acceptable SUS score supports earlier findings
by de Vries et al. (2021), who reported SUS scores between 69.17 and 74.17 for a
tangible tabletop setup. This could suggest that the novel interaction type itself might
contribute to more average usability ratings. However, the moments of confusion
observedinthisstudyarealsorelatedtothetypesofquestionsidentifiedbyHansenand
Halskov (2014), such as "How can I manipulate [specific aspects of the simulation]?"
Although users attempted behavioural strategies similar to those described by Hansen
andHalskov(2014),theinterfacelackedclarityinexplorationasparticipantssometimes
77
--- Page 78 ---
stoppedinteractinginthesemomentsofconfusionandsimplyobservedtheUIinstead.
This indicates that game drivers such as ‘Empowerment of Creativity and Feedback’
and ‘Unpredictability and Curiosity’(Chou, 2025) were not fully realised, since
exploration did not always help overcome confusion, and while some unpredictable
moments were engaging, like the day-to-night switch or cities turning sad because
they did not have a balance of fossil and renewable energy sources, others caused
confusion, such as moving windmill tokens in response to moved wind animations.
Regarding previously identified design considerations, the evaluation especially
agrees with providing immediate feedback afteran interaction with a token(Da Costa,
Zen, & Tavares, 2024; Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, & Tavares, 2024; Hansen &
Halskov, 2014), since this helped players understand whether their interaction was
intended and correct. Additionally, the concept of signifiers supported the players
and this research highlights the need of strong grabbing affordances for the tokens
(Da Costa, Zen, & Tavares, 2024).
However, the findings contrast with the theory proposed by Da Costa, Zen, and
Tavares (2024) and Da Costa, Zen, De Oliveira, and Tavares (2024), which suggests
that reducing degrees of freedom, such as limiting the number of tokens or users, in
simple tasks can lead to a greater sense of control. In this research, the number of
tokenswashighandthetasksweresimple. Still,onceusershadlearnedtheinteraction,
they seemed to understand the gameplay and enjoyed interacting with the tokens,
with moments of confusion being induced due to the simulation design and not the
amount of tokens. This could indicate that a high number of tokens is not necessarily
a barrier to usability if the gameplay and underlying simulation itself remains easy to
understand with high learnability.
Oneimportantconsiderationisthatthegradualintroductionoftokenssignificantly
extended the interaction time. This should be considered when placing a tangible
tabletop installation in environments where visitors typically spend limited time, such
as museums.
Overall, the tangible tabletop installation could be very well prototyped using
3D printing and a combination of Figma, LottieFiles and ProtoPie to build a WoZ
prototype. ThisisinlinewithMastetal.(2023)suggestingWoZasasuitabletechnique
for testing a technology that is not yet supported and Ye et al. (2024) mentioning
ProtoPieasasuitablerapidprototypingtool. ProtoPieisalsorecognisedasapowerful
tool since it would have supported, for instance, sound and the inclusion of active
tokens by working with ESP32 microcontrollers that communicate with ProtoPie
Connect via Python scripts. Even though it has to be agreed with Derboven et al.
(2010) that, especially for multi-touch, WoZ can phase problems with delay due to the
human wizard’s reaction time, the task of the human wizard in this realisation of a
tangible tabletop prototype was not of high cognitive load, contrasting with Mast et
al. (2023). Nevertheless, it should be noted that this process was so effective mainly
because the placeholders on the tabletop UI indicated where to position the tokens, as
this meant the prototype did not have to react to freely placed tokens.
WhilethisstudyappliedHevner’sISResearchFrameworktoguideitsmethodology,
the research project also aligns with the principles of Research through Design (RtD),
asresearchcontributionsthroughtheprototypedtangibletabletopasaresearchartifact
78
--- Page 79 ---
were made by "addressing under-constrained problems" of interacting with a large
amount of tokens(Zimmerman, Forlizzi, & Evenson, 2007). This way, it can be stated
that intermediate knowledge was created as this design research led to insights not
only tied to this project but also does not aim to be "the generality of a theory"(Höök
& Löwgren, 2012).
10.2 Limitations and Learnings
The generalisability of the results is limited by the museum context in where the
tangible tabletop setup is placed, as it strongly influences the definition of the target
group interacting with the installation and the project requirements. Additionally, the
underlying simulation of the energy grid influenced how the large number of tokens
could be incorporated into the gameplay, as well as which actions felt natural, such
as placing an energy supplier, and which did not, such as dragging wind turbines.
Therefore, the application domain also influences which actions feel intuitive and the
roles and functionalities that the tokens can have.
In addition, collaboration between users was not tested and was not the focus
of this research. Because of this, the results cannot confirm how interaction with a
large number of tokens would change when multiple players are involved, or how the
gameplay might perform if players were able to communicate and work together.
In general, one limitation is that the empirical findings were coded only by the
author. This may have introduced bias and limited alternative interpretations of the
qualitative data.
Another limitation is the small number of participants in the usability study. Since
only five usability tests were conducted, the results are mostly based on qualitative
insights. The results of the SUS and UES-SF questionnaires were only analysed
by looking at the average scores, while no further statistical analysis was possible.
Because of that, the findings are more useful to understand possible directions and
issues, but further testing with a higher number of participants would be needed to
make strong general conclusions and create more reliable results.
Regarding the methodology, the literature review provided a strong foundation
of knowledge for all three sub-research questions. The competitive analysis offered
helpful insights into how existing energy-related games translate real-world concepts
into gameplay and it also showed which types of actions are currently supported by
tangibletabletops, whichcontributedtoansweringthefirstsub-researchquestion. The
stakeholder interviews and Co-Design sessions gave useful input into challenges in
the interaction with the setup and tokens, especially the problem of interacting with a
large amount. For the second sub-research question, they supported the ideation of
concepts and helped identify common design expectations from a stakeholder point of
view. However, the Co-Design session might have produced more creative results if it
had been done in a group setting rather than individually.
Finally, due to time constraints, it was not possible to test early concepts before
developing the high-fidelity prototype. As a key learning, testing low- or mid-fidelity
prototypes earlier could have helped to identify issues sooner, such as the moments of
confusion, which is important for successful iterative development.
79
--- Page 80 ---
10.3 Future Work
One important direction for future work is to test the tangible tabletop setup with
multiple players. This would allow to explore how collaboration affects interaction
with a large number of tokens, as well as how it influences gameplay dynamics and
communication, which in turn could influence the perceived usability, engagement
and learning.
Another aspect worth exploring is the integration of real-world information or
concepts more clearly into the gameplay while maintaining a simple game concept.
This could help to increase user interest in the energy topic and improve the learning
outcomes, especially for players who are not very well familiar with the subject.
Toreduceconfusion duringtheinteraction, futureversionsoftheprototypeshould
include better explanations of each new interaction step and could include a help
button or provide automated hints after a certain amount of time. These additions
could support users more actively in moments of uncertainty, improve learnability,
and maintain the flow of interaction.
Given the museum context, it is also important to consider the duration of the
interaction. To reduce the time, future work could explore avoiding touch interaction
completely and only interacting with the physical tokens, testing collaborative play to
divide tasks, or adjusting the number of tokens that were used.
It may also be helpful to test the prototype in different physical settings, such
as a location with more space around the tabletop. A tilted tabletop setup could
also be investigated to see if it improves visibility and comfort of the interaction.
Additionally, the height of the available tabletop for this study was fixed at ~85cm.
However, based on Berufsgenossenschaft Nahrungsmittel und Gastgewerbe (BGN)
(n.d.),anergonomicsettingwhenworkingonastandingtablecanbeachievedthrough
a working height of around 10 to 15cm below the person’s elbow height. Calculated
withtheanthropometricdatabaseandthe1DtoolfromDINED(n.d.), thetargetgroup
was set at Dutch adults ranging from 31 to 60 with mixed genders based on the target
groupanalysis. Theresultedelbowheights(AppendixR)couldbeusedtosuggestthat
forfuturetesting, afixedworkingheightof~91cm(basedonthe50thpercentile)oran
adjustable setting between ~80cm and ~101cm (based on the 5th and 95th percentile)
could be tested for influences on the experience.
Finally,furtherworkoniteratingthetokendesignwouldbevaluable. Forexample,
futureversionscouldexploretokensshapedlikethereal-worldbuildingsplacedinside
transparentmaterialssuchasplexiglasscontainerswithstrongergrabbingaffordances,
which might improve making the start of the interaction more intuitive and reduce
cognitive load. Additionally, the impact of active tokens could be analysed by keeping
them passive but simulating their state using fibre optics.
80
--- Page 81 ---
11 Conclusion
Theaimofthisresearchwastoexplorehowinteractionwithalargenumberofphysical
tokensaspartofatangibletabletopcouldbeeffectivelydesignedtooptimiseusability,
engagement and learning throughout an interactive energy simulation. Several key
design strategies were identified through the development and evaluation of a WoZ
prototype using Design Thinking and Co-Design methods. These include applying
usability heuristics to reduce cognitive overload, incorporating game design elements
to promote engagement, and directing users’ attention towards learning objectives.
The findings suggest that success depends on combining a minimalist, aesthetically
pleasing interface with high learnability, the gradual introduction of tokens, and clear
affordances. Inamuseumcontext,wherethisinteractionisperceivedasnovel,asimple
gameplay with strong visual and functional cues are particularly important. Overall,
effective interaction with a large number of tokens is possible when complexity is
managed by clearly integrating the tokens into the game’s goals, creating meaningful
groupings on the UI to reduce clutter, and limiting the functionality of the tokens.
While not including possible collaboration in the design and evaluation process of
the tangible tabletop interaction, Co-Design methods provided new insights into how
stakeholders expect to interact with multiple tokens while Design Thinking methods
allowedforastructureddesignprocess. EventhoughtheCo-Designsessionsraisedthe
questionofbeingoverwhelmedbytoomanytokens,focusingonasimplebutengaging
gameplay experience contradicts the previous assumption that too many degrees of
freedom with a high number of tokens lead to less sense of control. However, the
researchalsohighlightstheimportanceofanunderlyingsimulationthatprovidesgood
tutorialisation and learnability, and shows that simplified gameplay, when it does not
support focused attention, leads only to limited learning outcomes and mainly fails to
raise interest in the topic.
Further research is needed to understand how collaboration affects the interaction
withalargeamountoftokensaswellasthethreevariablesofusability,engagementand
learning. For researchers or designers aiming to include multiple tokens in a tangible
tabletopsetting, itcanberecommendedtocombineknowndesignconsiderationswith
the already mentioned simple underlying simulation that gradually introduces more
tokens, groups them visually on the UI, and allows only for limited functionalities.
This research contributes to the fields of HCI and TUIs by demonstrating how a
large number of physical tokens can be incorporated into a tangible tabletop setup in
a museum without overwhelming users. It also considers what must be taken into
account to ensure that the interaction remains intuitive and engaging, and promotes
small learning about the subject of the simulation.
81
--- Page 82 ---
References
100FAT B.V. (2023, 6).Interactieve installaties voor Musea en Bedrijven - 100FAT.
Retrieved fromhttps://www.100fat.nl/
Adobe. (n.d.). Official Adobe Photoshop - free trial and online photo design app.
Retrieved fromhttps://www.adobe.com/products/photoshop.html
AlArfaj, A. A., & Solaiman, E. (2022, 1). Comparing different qualitative methods
to understand user experience in Saudi Arabia.arXiv (Cornell University).
Retrieved fromhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04232 doi: 10.48550/arxiv.2212
.04232
Almeshari, M., Dowell, J., & Nyhan, J. (2019, 6). Using Personas to Model
Museum Visitors. blicatiAdjunct Puon of the 27th Conference on User
Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization, 199, 401–405. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/3314183.3323867 doi: 10.1145/3314183.3323867
Almeshari, M., Dowell, J., & Nyhan, J. (2020, 12). Museum Mobile guide
preferences of different visitor personas.Journal on Computing and Cultural
Heritage,14(1),1–13. Retrievedfromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3423186 doi:
10.1145/3423186
Asaad, C., Baïna, K., & Ghogho, M. (2024, 9). Bridging the Gap: Participatory
Modeling for Stakeholder-Driven NoSQL Database Design.MODELS Com-
panion ’24: Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 27th International Conference on
Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems, 685–689. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/3652620.3688564 doi: 10.1145/3652620.3688564
ATLAS.ti Scientific Software Development GmbH. (2025, 2).ATLAS.TI | the 1
software for qualitative data analysis.Retrieved fromhttps://atlasti.com/
AttrakDiff. (n.d.). Retrieved fromhttps://attrakdiff.de/
Autodesk. (n.d.). Autodesk Fusion | 3D CAD, CAM, CAE, PCB Cloud-Based
Software | Autodesk.Retrieved fromhttps://www.autodesk.com/products/
fusion-360/overview
Baxter, K., Courage, C., & Caine, K. (2015).Understanding your Users(2nd ed.).
Morgan Kaufmann. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1016/c2013-0-13611
-2 doi: 10.1016/c2013-0-13611-2
Berkhauer, A. (2024, 9). Is electricity cheaper at night? Off-peak explained.
Retrieved from https://www .moneysupermarket .com/gas -and -electricity/
is-electricity-cheaper-at-night/
Berufsgenossenschaft Nahrungsmittel und Gastgewerbe (BGN). (n.d.).Ergonomie
– Steharbeit.Retrieved fromhttps://bgn-branchenwissen.de/praxishilfen
-von-a-z/ergonomie/steharbeit
Brain, M., & Roos, D. (2023, 10). How power grids work. Retrieved from
https://science.howstuffworks.com/environmental/energy/power.htm
Brett, J., Gatzidis, C., Davis, T., Amelidis, P., Xu, N., & Gladwell, T. (2021).
Learning through play; a study investigating how effective video games can
be regarding keyboard education at a beginner level. In Proceedings of
the 16th international conference on the foundations of digital games.New
82
--- Page 83 ---
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/3472538.3472555 doi: 10.1145/3472538.3472555
Buchan, J., Bano, M., Zowghi, D., McDonell, S., & Shinde, A. (2017, 06).
Alignment of stakeholder expectations about user involvement in agile software
development..
Buchenau, M., & Suri, J. F. (2000, 8). Experience prototyping.Proceedings of
the Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. Retrieved from https://
doi.org/10.1145/347642.347802 doi: 10.1145/347642.347802
Cambridge University Press. (2025, 3). learning.. Retrieved from https://
dictionary.cambridge.org/de/worterbuch/englisch/learning
ChatGPT. (n.d.). ChatGPT. Retrieved fromhttps://chatgpt.com/
Chou, Y.-K. (2025, 3). The Octalysis Framework for Gamification and Behav-
ioralDesign. Retrievedfrom https://yukaichou.com/gamification-examples/
octalysis-complete-gamification-framework/
ClaudioA. (n.d.). Power the Grid by ClaudioA.Retrieved fromhttps://claudioa
.itch.io/power-the-grid
Colossal Order Ltd. (2015, 3). Cities: Skylines. Retrieved fromhttps://store
.steampowered.com/app/255710/Cities_Skylines/?l=german
Cooper, A., Reimann, R., Cronin, D., Noessel, C., Csizmadi, J., & LeMoine, D.
(2014). AboutFace: TheEssentialsofInteractionDesign (4thed.). WileyJohn
+ Sons.
currentsnewmedia. (2024, 4).SMART City.Retrieved fromhttps://www.instagram
.com/currentsnewmedia/reel/C6NBT_ZsTn_/
Cutting, J., & Iacovides, I. (2022, October). Learning by doing: Intrinsic integration
directs attention to increase learning in games.Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput.
Interact., 6(CHI PLAY). Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3549503
doi: 10.1145/3549503
Da Costa, V. K., Zen, E., De Oliveira, J. O., & Tavares, T. A. (2024, 10). Tangible
tabletops: practical experiment and considerations for a design framework.
IHC ’24: Proceedings of the XXIII Brazilian Symposium on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, 1–12. Retrieved from https://doi .org/10 .1145/
3702038.3702109 doi: 10.1145/3702038.3702109
Da Costa, V. K., Zen, E., & Tavares, T. A. (2024, 1). The interface is on the
table: Systematic Literature Review about interaction design to applications for
tangible tabletops. IHC ’23: Proceedings of the XXII Brazilian Symposium
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–12. Retrieved fromhttps://
doi.org/10.1145/3638067.3638091 doi: 10.1145/3638067.3638091
Dam, R. F., & Siang, T. Y. (2025, 4).What is Design Thinking and Why Is It So
Popular? Retrieved fromhttps://www.interaction-design.org/literature/
article/what-is-design-thinking-and-why-is-it-so-popular
DaSilva, J. (2020, 6).A Guide to Competitive Analysis for UX Design | Adobe XD
Ideas. Retrieved fromhttps://xd.adobe.com/ideas/process/user-research/
guide-to-competitive-analysis-ux-design/
David Made This. (2024, 2). Power Network tycoon on Steam.Retrieved from
https://store.steampowered.com/app/2429930/Power_Network_Tycoon/
83
--- Page 84 ---
DeepL SE. (n.d.).DeepL write: Ihr KI-Schreibassistent.Retrieved fromhttps://
www.deepl.com/de/write
Derboven, J., De Roeck, D., Verstraete, M., Geerts, D., & De Grooff, D. (2010, 6).
Low-Fidelity Prototyping for Multi-Touch Surfaces.EICS 10. Retrieved from
https://lirias.kuleuven.be/bitstream/123456789/296974/1/Derboven+et+
al+position+paper.pdf
de Souza Alcantara, T., Ferreira, J., & Maurer, F. (2013). Interactive prototyping
of tabletop and surface applications. InProceedings of the 5th acm sigchi
symposium on engineering interactive computing systems(p. 229–238). New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/2494603.2480313 doi: 10.1145/2494603.2480313
de Vries, R. A. J., Keizers, G. H. J., van Arum, S. R., Haarman, J. A. M., Klaassen,
R., van Delden, R. W., ... van den Boer, J. H. W. (2021). Multimodal
interactive dining with the sensory interactive table: Two use cases. In
Companion publication of the 2020 international conference on multimodal
interaction(p. 332–340). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3395035.3425654 doi:
10.1145/3395035.3425654
Dicheva, D., & Hodge, A. (2018). Active learning through game play in a data
structures course. In Proceedings of the 49th acm technical symposium on
computer science education(p. 834–839). New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3159450
.3159605 doi: 10.1145/3159450.3159605
Digital Society School. (n.d.).Design Method Toolkit by the Digital Society School.
Retrieved fromhttps://toolkits.dss.cloud/design/
DINED. (n.d.). 1D Anthropometric database.Retrieved fromhttps://dined.io
.tudelft.nl/en/database/introduction
Dissemination Implementation Models in Health. (n.d.).User Engagement Scale
(UES) – Short.Retrieved fromhttps://dissemination-implementation.org/
assessment-instrument/user-engagement-scale-ues-short/
DVSI. (n.d.). Tangible Object Recognition Table. Retrieved from https://
www.dvsi.com/products/object-recognition-table
Dörflinger, M. (2019, 8). DIN EN ISO 9241-11 - Anforderungen an die Ge-
brauchstauglichkeit – Leitsätze 187; Digital Management.Retrieved from
https://www.digital-management.at/din-en-iso-9241-11/
Electronic Arts. (2013, 3). SimCity™ . Retrieved fromhttps://www.ea.com/de/
games/simcity/simcity
Enbridge Inc. (n.d.). What is the grid? Explaining a modern engineering marvel.
Retrieved fromhttps://www.enbridge.com/energy-matters/energy-school/
grid-101
Falk, J. H. (2016).Identity and the Museum Visitor Experience. Routledge.
Figma. (n.d.). Figma: The Collaborative Interface Design Tool.Retrieved from
https://www.figma.com/
Fonts, G. (n.d.).Lexend - Google Fonts.Retrieved fromhttps://fonts.google.com/
specimen/Lexend
84
--- Page 85 ---
Fowler, A. (2013). Measuring learning and fun in video games for young children:
a proposed method. In Proceedings of the 12th international conference
on interaction design and children(p. 639–642). New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/
10.1145/2485760.2485879 doi: 10.1145/2485760.2485879
Fowler, A. (2016). Informal stem learning in game jams, hackathons and game
creationevents. In(p.38–41). NewYork,NY,USA: AssociationforComputing
Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/2897167.2897179 doi:
10.1145/2897167.2897179
George, T. (2022, 1). Semi-Structured Interview | Definition, Guide & Exam-
ples. Retrievedfrom https://www.scribbr.com/methodology/semi-structured
-interview/
Gibbons, S. (2024, 4).Design Thinking 101.Retrieved fromhttps://www.nngroup
.com/articles/design-thinking/
Goretskaya, R. (2023, 8). UX/UI Design Thinking Process — step by step activities.
Retrieved from https://medium .com/%40goretska .margarita/ux -ui -design
-thinking-process-step-by-step-activities-658050314050
Guide: How to Effectively Measure Learning Impact. (n.d.). Retrieved from
https://www.learningbank.io/blog/effectively-measure-learning-impact
Hansen, N. B., & Halskov, K. (2014, 10). Material interactions with tangible
tabletops. NordiCHI’14: Proceedingsofthe8thNordicConferenceonHuman-
Computer Interaction: Fun, Fast, Foundational, 441–450. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/2639189.2639200 doi: 10.1145/2639189.2639200
Haque, M. R., Saxena, D., Weathington, K., Chudzik, J., & Guha, S. (2024). Are we
askingtherightquestions?: Designingforcommunitystakeholders’interactions
with ai in policing. In Proceedings of the 2024 chi conference on human
factors in computing systems.New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642738 doi:
10.1145/3613904.3642738
Hashemi-Pour, C., & Churchville, F. (2024, 4). user interface (UI).Retrieved
from https://www.techtarget.com/searchapparchitecture/definition/user
-interface-UI
Hevner, A., R, A., March, S., T, S., Park, Park, J., ... Sudha (2004, 03). Design
science in information systems research.Management Information Systems
Quarterly, 28, 75-106.
Höök, K., & Löwgren, J. (2012, 10). Strong concepts: Intermediate-level knowledge
in interaction design research. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction, 19(3). Retrieved from https://doi-org.ezproxy2.utwente.nl/
10.1145/2362364.2362371 doi: 10.1145/2362364.2362371
Huang,K.,Iravantchi,Y.,Chen,D.,&Sample,A.P. (2024,11). MagDesk: interactive
tabletop workspace based on passive magnetic tracking.Proceedings of the
ACM on Interactive Mobile Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 8(4), 1–31.
Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3699756 doi: 10.1145/3699756
Hyzy, M., & Wardle, B. (2023). Gamification for product excellence. Packt
Publishing.
85
--- Page 86 ---
ideum. (n.d.). Tangible Engine 3.0.Retrieved fromhttps://www.tangibleengine
.com/
Interaction Design Foundation. (2024a, 11). Codesign. Retrieved from
https :// www .interaction -design .org / literature / topics / codesign # when
_should_designers_use_codesign?-15
Interaction Design Foundation. (2024b, 12). What is How Might We (HMW)?
Retrieved from https://www .interaction -design .org/literature/topics/
how-might-we#how_might_we_create_the_most_effective_hmw_questions?-1
Interaction Design Foundation. (2025a, 3).What are Signifiers?Retrieved from
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/signifiers
InteractionDesignFoundation. (2025b, 2). WhatisDesignThinking? Retrievedfrom
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/design-thinking
Interactive scape GmbH. (n.d.).Interactive Scape: Multitouch Displays & Object
Recognition Solutions.Retrieved fromhttps://www.interactive-scape.com/
Jacob, M., Damen, I., & Lallemand, C. (2023, 2). Exploring the Embodied
Experience of Walking Meetings through Bodystorming – Implications for
Design. Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded,andEmbodiedInteraction ,1–14. Retrievedfromhttps://doi.org/
10.1145/3569009.3572795 doi: 10.1145/3569009.3572795
Kaltenbrunner, M., & Bencina, R. (n.d.). reacTIVision 1.5.1. Retrieved from
https://reactivision.sourceforge.net/
Karjalainen, M., Puuska, S., & Kokkonen, T. (2021). Measuring learning in a
cyber security exercise. InProceedings of the 12th international conference
on education technology and computers(p. 205–209). New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/
10.1145/3436756.3437046 doi: 10.1145/3436756.3437046
Kejstová, M., Stoiber, C., Boucher, M., Kandlhofer, M., Kriglstein, S., & Aigner, W.
(2023). Construct and play: Engaging students with visualizations through
playful methods. In Companion proceedings of the annual symposium on
computer-human interaction in play(p. 96–101). New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/
10.1145/3573382.3616082 doi: 10.1145/3573382.3616082
Krause, R. (2024, 1). Storyboards help visualize UX ideas. Retrieved from
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/storyboards-visualize-ideas/
Kubicki, S., Lebrun, Y., Lepreux, S., Adam, E., Kolski, C., & Mandiau, R. (2012,
12). Simulation in contexts involving an interactive table and tangible objects.
Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, 31, 116–131. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.2012.10.012 doi: 10.1016/j.simpat.2012
.10.012
Lalmas, M., O’Brien, H., & Yom-Tov, E. (2014).Measuring user engagement
(Vol. 6). doi: 10.2200/S00605ED1V01Y201410ICR038
Laubheimer, P. (2025, 3). Beyond the NPS: Measuring Perceived Usability
with the SUS, NASA-TLX, and the Single Ease Question After Tasks and
UsabilityTests. Retrievedfrom https://www.nngroup.com/articles/measuring
-perceived-usability/
86
--- Page 87 ---
Lebrun, Y., Adam, E., Mandiau, R., & Kolski, C. (2014, 11). A model for managing
interactionsbetweentangibleandvirtualagentsonanRFIDinteractivetabletop:
Casestudyintrafficsimulation. JournalofComputerandSystemSciences ,81(3),
585–598. Retrievedfromhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcss.2014.11.011 doi:
10.1016/j.jcss.2014.11.011
Lebrun, Y., Adam, E., Mandiau, R., & Kolski, C. (2015, 11). A model for managing
interactions between tangible and virtual agents on an rfid interactive tabletop:
Case study in traffic simulation.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 81,
585–598. doi: 10.1016/j.jcss.2014.11.011
LottieFiles. (n.d.). LottieFiles: Download Free lightweight animations for website
apps. Retrieved fromhttps://lottiefiles.com/
Massachusets Institute of Technology. (n.d.).Tangible Media Group.Retrieved from
https://tangible.media.mit.edu/
Mast, D., Roidl, A., & Jylha, A. (2023). Wizard of oz prototyping for interactive
spatial augmented reality in hci education: Experiences with rapid prototyping
for interactive spatial augmented reality. InExtended abstracts of the 2023
chi conference on human factors in computing systems.New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/
10.1145/3544549.3573861 doi: 10.1145/3544549.3573861
METGroep. (2020, 9). Renewable and solar energy vs fossil fuels.Retrieved
from https://group.met.com/en/mind-the-fyouture/mindthefyouture/solar
-energy-vs-fossil-fuels
Miro. (2025). MIRO|TheInnovationWorkspace. Retrievedfrom https://miro.com/
index/
NESO. (n.d.). Balancing the Grid - Interactive game | National Energy System
Operator. Retrieved fromhttps://www.neso.energy/energy-101/balancing
-grid-interactive-game
Nielsen, J. (2024a, 2).10 Usability heuristics for user interface design.Retrieved
from https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/
Nielsen, J. (2024b, 1). Usability 101: Introduction to Usability. Retrieved
from https://www .nngroup .com/articles/usability -101 -introduction -to
-usability/
O’Brien, H., & Toms, E. (2010, 01). The development and evaluation of a survey to
measure user engagement.JASIST, 61, 50-69. doi: 10.1002/asi.21229
Olson, K. E., O’Brien, M. A., Rogers, W. A., & Charness, N. (2010, 9). Diffusion
of Technology: Frequency of use for Younger and Older Adults.Ageing
International, 36(1), 123–145. Retrieved fromhttps://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih
.gov/articles/PMC3370300/ doi: 10.1007/s12126-010-9077-9
OneOrWa. (2024, 8).Idle Energy Tycoon:Power Grid.Retrieved fromhttps://play
.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.oneorwa.idleenergytycoon2&hl=en
_AU
Oxford University Press. (n.d.). Definition of tangible adjective from
the Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary.Retrieved from https://www
.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/english/tangible
O’Brien, H. L., Cairns, P., & Hall, M. (2018). A practical approach to measuring
87
--- Page 88 ---
user engagement with the refined user engagement scale (ues) and new ues
short form. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 112, 28-
39. Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1071581918300041 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2018.01.004
Perski,O.,Blandford,A.,West,R.,&Michie,S. (2017). Conceptualisingengagement
withdigitalbehaviourchangeinterventions: asystematicreviewusingprinciples
from critical interpretive synthesis.Translational Behavioral Medicine,7(2),
254–267. doi: 10.1007/s13142-016-0453-1
ProductPlan. (2024, 11). What is MoSCoW Prioritization? | Overview of the
MoSCoW Method.Retrieved fromhttps://www.productplan.com/glossary/
moscow-prioritization/
ProtoPie. (n.d. -a). The Basics of ProtoPie Connect | Connect | ProtoPie
Guide. Retrieved from https :// www .protopie .io / learn / docs / connect /
getting-started
ProtoPie. (n.d. -b). ProtoPie: Interactive Prototyping Tool. Retrieved from
https://www.protopie.io/
Raftopoulos, M. (2024, 10). Designing Tiny Robots: Engaging Stakeholders in
Collaborative AI System Design. Mindtrek ’24: Proceedings of the 27th
International Academic Mindtrek Conference, 121–132. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/3681716.3681722 doi: 10.1145/3681716.3681722
Ramnarine-Rieks, A. (2012). Learning through game design: an investigation
on the effects in library instruction sessions. InProceedings of the 2012
iconference(p. 606–607). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/2132176.2132307 doi:
10.1145/2132176.2132307
Reactable. (2022, 10). Music Knowledge Technology.Retrieved fromhttps://
reactable.com/
Rekhi, S. (2018, 6). Don Norman’s Principles of Interaction Design - Sachin Rekhi
- medium. Retrieved from https://medium.com/@sachinrekhi/don-normans
-principles-of-interaction-design-51025a2c0f33
Rhombico Games. (2022, 2). Power to the people.Retrieved from https://
store.steampowered.com/app/1413370/Power_to_the_People/
Sanders, E. B.-n., & Stappers, P. J. (2008, 2). Co-creation and the new landscapes
of design.CoDesign,4(1), 5–18. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1080/
15710880701875068 doi: 10.1080/15710880701875068
Sauro, J., PhD. (2018, 9). 5 ways to interpret a SUS Score.Retrieved from
https://measuringu.com/interpret-sus-score/
Schell, J. (2020).The Art of Game Design : a book of lenses(3rd ed.). CRC Press,
Taylor Francis Group. doi: 10.1201/b22101
ScienceDirect. (n.d.). Fiducial Marker.Retrieved fromhttps://www.sciencedirect
.com/topics/computer-science/fiducial-marker
Segura, E. M., Vega-Cebrián, J. M., Morillo, A. A. M., Velasco, L. C., & Bellucci, A.
(2024, 1). Embodied Hybrid Bodystorming to Design an XR Suture Training
Experience. TEI ’24: Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference
on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction, 1–12. Retrieved from
88
--- Page 89 ---
https://doi.org/10.1145/3623509.3633362 doi: 10.1145/3623509.3633362
Service Design Tools. (n.d.). Rough Prototyping. Retrieved from https://
servicedesigntools.org/tools/rough-prototyping
Shaer, O. (2009, 1). Tangible user interfaces: past, present, and future directions.
Foundations and Trends®in Human–Computer Interaction,3(1-2), 1–137. Re-
trievedfrom https://doi.org/10.1561/1100000026 doi:10.1561/1100000026
Shuhalii, A. (2021, 12). What is the difference between low and high fidelity pro-
totypes? Retrieved fromhttps://medium.com/design-bootcamp/what-is-the
-difference-between-low-and-high-fidelity-prototypes-b1f3612f85f7
Shukairy, A. (2024, 9). Usability Metrics: A guide to measuring the User
Experience - INVESP. Retrieved from https://www .invespcro .com/blog/
usability-metrics/
Singh, M., Hoque, X., Zeng, D., Wang, Y., Ikeda, K., & Dhall, A. (2023).
Do i have your attention: A large scale engagement prediction dataset and
baselines. InProceedings of the 25th international conference on multimodal
interaction(p. 174–182). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3577190.3614164 doi:
10.1145/3577190.3614164
Sosebashvili, G. (2025, 4).Storyboarding as one of the ideation techniques in UX.
Retrieved from https://redberry .international/storyboarding -ideation
-techniques/
Souropetsis, M., & Kyza, E. A. (2025, February). Compare: Design anddevelopment
ofa gamifiedaugmentedrealitylearning environmentforculturalheritage sites.
J. Comput. Cult. Herit., 18(1). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1145/
3703917 doi: 10.1145/3703917
Speelman, E. N., Escano, E., Marcos, D., & Becu, N. (2023). Serious games and
citizen science; from parallel pathways to greater synergies.Current Opinion
in Environmental Sustainability, 64, 101320. Retrieved from https://www
.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877343523000672 doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2023.101320
Statista. (2022, 12). Distribution of museum visits by Museumcard holders in
the Netherlands 2020, by age.Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/
statistics/797745/distribution-of-museum-visits-of-museumcard-holders
-in-the-netherlands-by-age/
Taylor-Powell, E., & Renner, M. (2003). Analyzing qualitative data [Computer
software manual]. Retrievedfromhttps://www.betterevaluation.org/sites/
default/files/analyzing_qualitative_data.pdf (ProgramDevelopmentand
Evaluation)
Teekens, S. (in press).AllChips on the Table: Evaluating High-Density, Side-by-Side
Object Tracking on Interactive Tabletops.University of Twente. Retrieved from
https://essay.utwente.nl/view/programme/60030.html
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO). (2018, 3).ISO 9241-
11:2018. Retrieved fromhttps://www.iso.org/standard/63500.html
Thomas, N. (2019, 9). How to use the System Usability Scale (SUS) to evaluate
the usability of your website.Retrieved from https://usabilitygeek.com/
89
--- Page 90 ---
how -to -use -the -system -usability -scale -sus -to -evaluate -the -usability
-of-your-website/
Tian, Y., Zhou, K., & Pelleg, D. (2021, September). What and how long: Prediction
of mobile app engagement.ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 40(1). Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/3464301 doi: 10.1145/3464301
Tindall, A., Patterson, D., & Costain, S. (2018). Educate your avatar, educate your
mind: motivating learning through play. InProceedings of the australasian
computer science week multiconference.New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery. Retrieved fromhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3167918
.3167919 doi: 10.1145/3167918.3167919
Tognazzini, B. (2014, 12). First Principles of Interaction Design (Revised
& Expanded). Retrieved from https :// asktog .com / atc / principles -of
-interaction-design/
Union of Concerned Scientists. (2015, 2).How the Electricity Grid Works.Retrieved
from https://www.ucs.org/resources/how-electricity-grid-works
usability.de. (n.d.).Conformity with User Expectations in the usability.de glossary
– usability.de.Retrieved fromhttps://www.usability.de/en/usability-user
-experience/glossary/conformity-with-user-expectations.html
UX Planet. (2020, 7). Top Things to Know About UX Competitive Analy-
sis. Retrieved from https://uxplanet .org/top -things -to -know -about -ux
-competitive-analysis-d91689fd8b36
Vieira, B. R., & Santos, C. Q. (2024). Learning through play: design and
creation of a narrative game-based learning experience. InProceedings of
the xxii brazilian symposium on human factors in computing systems.New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/3638067.3638135 doi: 10.1145/3638067.3638135
Ye, Q., Yong, Z. Z., Han, B., Yen, C. C., & Zheng, C. (2024). Papertouch:
Tangibleinterfacesthroughpapercraftandtouchscreendevices. In Proceedings
of the 2024 chi conference on human factors in computing systems.New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642571 doi: 10.1145/3613904.3642571
Yee, N. (2007, 01). Motivations for play in online games.Cyberpsychology &
behavior: theimpactoftheInternet,multimediaandvirtualrealityonbehavior
and society,9, 772-5. doi: 10.1089/cpb.2006.9.772
Zhang, Y., Han, R., Zhou, R., Gyory, P., Zheng, C., Shih, P. C., ... Leithinger,
D. (2024). Wizard of props: Mixed reality prototyping with physical
props to design responsive environments. InProceedings of the eighteenth
international conference on tangible, embedded, and embodied interaction.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/3623509.3633395 doi: 10.1145/3623509.3633395
Zimmerman, J., Forlizzi, J., & Evenson, S. (2007). Research through design
as a method for interaction design research in hci. InProceedings of the
sigchi conference on human factors in computing systems(p. 493–502). New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. Retrieved from
https://doi-org.ezproxy2.utwente.nl/10.1145/1240624.1240704 doi: 10
90
--- Page 91 ---
.1145/1240624.1240704
Zufferey, G., Jermann, P., Lucchi, A., & Dillenbourg, P. (2009, 02). Tinkersheets:
Using paper forms to control and visualize tangible simulations.Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction,
TEI’09. doi: 10.1145/1517664.1517740
91
--- Page 92 ---
AI Disclaimer
During the preparation of this work, DeepL(DeepL SE, n.d.) was used to improve
readability by correcting errors in spelling and grammar. After using this tool, the
contentandsentencestructurewasthoroughlyreviewedandeditedasneeded,therefore
taking full responsibility for the final outcome. Additionally, ChatGPT’s(ChatGPT,
n.d.) image generation feature was used to create the landscape background image
shown in the high-fi prototype. The image was edited and manipulated in Photoshop
(Adobe, n.d.) according to the needed outcome. The AI services offered by Atlas.ti
(ATLAS.ti Scientific Software Development GmbH, 2025), which was utilised for
coding qualitative data, were not used.
92
--- Page 93 ---
A Octalysis Framework
Figure A1: Octalysis Framework (Chou, 2025).
93
--- Page 94 ---
B Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline
 
Interview  &  Co-Design  Session  
Guideline  
Setup  Prepare  the  workspace   make  sure  to  allow  for  movement.   test  the  video  camera   prepare  consent  form  and  informational  brochure   prepare  “table”  and  “second  screen”  with  papers  and  whiteboard   check  bodystorm  materials   check  if  there  is  enough  record  time  left  on  camera!  
 Participant  ID:  X  Start  at:  XX:XX  End  at:  XX:XX   Hi  and  welcome  to  today's  interview  and  co-design  session!  Before  we  officially  start,  is  it  
okay
 
for
 
you
 
if
 
we
 
record
 
this
 
session
 
with
 
both
 
audio
 
and
 
video?
 
This
 
will
 
help
 
us
 
in
 
analysing
 
and
 
rewatching
 
parts
 
in
 
case
 
we
 
miss
 
important
 
elements
 
of
 
the
 
session.
 
(If
 
yes)
 
Perfect,
 
we
 
will
 
start
 
the
 
recording
 
now
 
and
 
please
 
don't
 
be
 
confused,
 
I
 
will
 
ask
 
you
 
immediately
 
again
 
if
 
it
 
is
 
fine
 
for
 
you
 
to
 
get
 
recorded,
 
so
 
we
 
also
 
have
 
your
 
confirmation
 
on
 
the
 
recording:
 
 Recording  started  
Okay,  so  welcome  again  to  this  session,  are  you  okay  with  being  recorded?  
 Recording  confirmed  
Alright,  so  as  a  background  to  today’s  session:  We  are  Stijn  and  Sarah,  both  double-degree  
Master
 
students,
 
which
 
means
 
we
 
are
 
enrolled
 
in
 
two
 
universities:
 
one
 
here
 
in
 
the
 
Netherlands
 
and
 
one
 
in
 
another
 
country,
 
in
 
our
 
cases
 
Sweden
 
and
 
Finland,
 
and
 
we
 
study
 
Human-Computer
 
Interaction
 
and
 
Design.
 
We
 
are
 
Master’s
 
Thesis
 
students
 
for
 
100%FAT,
 
an
 
art
 
and
 
technology
 
company
 
here
 
in
 
Enschede,
 
and
 
together
 
we
 
aim
 
to
 
explore
 
the
 
possibilities
 
of
 
interacting
 
with
 
multiple
 
tokens
 
with
 
a
 
tangible
 
tabletop
 
in
 
the
 
use
 
case
 
of
 
an
 
energy
 
grid.
 
Therefore,  this  interview  and  co-design  session  will  help  us  in  your  case  to  
(1)   …  gather  expert  knowledge  about  your  area  of  expertise  for  the  project…   (2)  …  gather  user  insights  relevant  to  the  project…  
…  but  also  understand  your  expectations  and  visions  towards  such  an  interaction  through  a  
little
 
prototyping
 
roleplay,
 
or
 
also
 
called
 
bodystorming
 
session,
 
which
 
is
 
the
 
co-design
 
part,
 
Figure B1: Page 1 of Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline.
94
--- Page 95 ---
 
Please  now  take  your  time  to  read  the  participant  information  sheet  and  sign  the  consent  
form.
 
Also,
 
please
 
ask
 
any
 
questions
 
that
 
might
 
come
 
up.
 
 Consent  form  signed  
Q:  Do  you  have  any  questions  before  we  start?  
●  .  
One  more  remark:  There  are  no  right  or  wrong  answers  or  designs,  every  feedback  and  
creation
 
is
 
valuable
 
and
 
only
 
with
 
honest
 
feedback
 
can
 
we
 
learn
 
and
 
get
 
better.
 
So
 
please
 
answer
 
the
 
questions
 
honestly
 
and
 
if
 
you
 
do
 
not
 
have
 
an
 
opinion
 
or
 
cannot
 
answer
 
any
 
of
 
the
 
questions
 
I
 
ask,
 
please
 
feel
 
free
 
to
 
say
 
so.
 
Also,
 
if
 
there
 
are
 
any
 
questions
 
you
 
would
 
not
 
like
 
to
 
answer,
 
just
 
let
 
me
 
know.
 
We
 
will
 
then
 
skip
 
it
 
and
 
continue
 
with
 
the
 
next
 
one.
 
Before  we  head  into  the  questions,  we  would  like  to  shortly  explain  to  you  the  concept  of  a  
tangible
 
tabletop
 
or
 
interactive
 
table.
 
An
 
interactive
 
table
 
is
 
a
 
table
 
that
 
allows
 
you
 
to
 
interact
 
with
 
it
 
collaboratively
 
through
 
touch,
 
a
 
little
 
bit
 
like
 
a
 
big
 
tablet.
 
With
 
a
 
tangible
 
tabletop,
 
you
 
can
 
use
 
physical
 
objects
 
such
 
as
 
these
 
knobs
 
to
 
interact
 
with
 
the
 
digital
 
interface
 
of
 
the
 
table,
 
which
 
reacts
 
to
 
these
 
physical
 
objects.
 
 
Demographic  Questions  (Ice  breaker)  
Let’s  get  started  with  some  easy  questions  about  you  as  a  person:  
Q:  Where  are  you  from?  
●  .  
Q:  How  old  are  you?  
 18  -  24   25  -  34   35  -  44   45  -  54  
Figure B2: Page 2 of Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline.
95
--- Page 96 ---
 
 55  -  65   65+  
Introduction  to  topic  
Q:  What  is  your  occupation?  
●  .  
Q:  Do  you  have  previous  experience  with  interactive  or  tangible  tables?  How  many  
times
 
have
 
you
 
interacted
 
with
 
an
 
interactive
 
table
 
in
 
the
 
past?
 
And
 
if
 
so,
 
what
 
kind
 
of
 
experience?
 
(e.g.
 
played
 
around
 
with
 
one,
 
designed
 
one,
 
...)
 
 none   once  or  twice   a  few  times   several  times   a  lot  
●  What  kind  of  experiences  did  you  have?  (e.g.  played  around  with  one,  designed  one,  
...):
 ○  .  
Q:  Do  you  play  games  regularly?  If  yes,  what  kind  of  games  do  you  play?  
●  .  
Key  
(1)  Expert  Key  Questions  
The  following  questions  are  now  for  me  to  learn  from  you  as  an  expert  in  your  field.  Feel  free  
to
 
answer
 
every
 
question
 
based
 
on
 
your
 
own
 
experience.
 
 
In  case  of  100%FAT  or  professors:  
Before  we  start,  I  have  two  more  questions:  
Q:  Have  you  designed  a  game  before?   yes   no  
Q:  Have  you  prototyped/built  for  a  combination  of  digital  and  physical  
installation
 
before?
  yes   no   
Figure B3: Page 3 of Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline.
96
--- Page 97 ---
 
(A)  (Energy  Grid)  Games  
1.  How  do  you  decide  what  aspects  of  a  real-life  scenario  (such  as  an  energy  grid)  to  
include
 
in
 
a
 
game
 
simulation?
 ○  .  
2.  What  design  elements  make  a  (simulation-based  tabletop)  game  engaging  for  
players?
 ○  .  
3.  How  can  game  interactions  be  designed  so  that  players  intuitively  understand  what  
they
 
can
 
do
 
and
 
that
 
they
 
have
 
to
 
use
 
the
 
tokens?
 ○  .  
4.  What  strategies  help  players  learn  from  the  game  without  making  it  feel  like  a  
lecture?
 ○  . 
(B)  Prototyping  for  digital  and  physical  
1.  What  are  best  practices  when  prototyping  a  hybrid  (digital  &  physical)  interactive  
tabletop
 
experience?
 ○  .  
2.  What  are  the  most  common  challenges  when  combining  physical  and  digital  
interactions
 
in
 
a
 
game?
 ○  .  
3.  How  can  the  tangible  interactions  be  designed  so  that  they  remain  intuitive  even  for  
first-time
 
users?
 
 ○  .  
4.  From  your  perspective,  what  prototyping  method  do  you  think  might  work  to  
simulate
 
a
 
working
 
tabletop
 
system
 
recognising
 
and
 
reacting
 
to
 
multiple
 
tokens?
 
Any
 
ideas
 
would
 
be
 
helpful!
 ○  . 
(C)  Museums  
1.  Do  you  have  insights  into  what  age  groups  most  commonly  visit  the  
Museumfabriek?
 ○  .  
2.  Have  you  ever  noticed  that  special  installations  attracted  new  or  different  visitor  
demographics?
 ○  .  
3.  Are  there  installations  that  visitors  generally  find  more  intuitive  or  easier  to  use ?  If  
so,
 
what
 
do
 
you
 
think
 
contributes
 
to
 
this?
 ○  .  
Figure B4: Page 4 of Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline.
97
--- Page 98 ---
 
4.  How  do  installations  typically  engage  visitors  so  that  they  keep  interacting  with  it?  ○  .  
5.  In  your  opinion,  if  installations  have  the  goal  to  educate  the  visitors  on  a  certain  topic,  
do
 
some
 
installations
 
lead
 
to
 
greater
 
learning
 
outcomes
 
than
 
others?
 
If
 
so,
 
what
 
do
 
you
 
think
 
might
 
be
 
the
 
reason
 
for
 
that?
 ○  .  
6.  Has  the  Museumfabriek  exhibited  interactive  or  tangible  tabletop  installations  
before?
  yes   no   don’t  know  
7.  If  yes:  Do  you  know  what  the  reactions  of  visitors  to  such  tables  were?  Do  they  like  
to
 
engage
 
with
 
them?
 ○  .  
8.  Our  research  focus  will  be  on  tangible  tabletops  that  offer  a  large  amount  of  physical  
tokens
 
to
 
interact
 
with.
 
What
 
do
 
you
 
think
 
could
 
be
 
challenging
 
for
 
visitors
 
if
 
a
 
tangible
 
tabletop
 
offers
 
about
 
20
 
tokens
 
they
 
can
 
interact
 
with?
 ○  .   Backlog:  
1.  Do  you  notice  differences  in  how  visitors  of  different  ages  interact  with  specific  
installations? ○  .  
2.  In  your  experience,  what  elements  attract  visitors  to  an  installation  so  that  they  
actively
 
start
 
playing
 
with
 
it? ○  .  
2.  On  average,  how  much  time  do  visitors  tend  to  spend  engaging  with  a  single  
interactive
 
installation,
 
such
 
as
 
a
 
tangible
 
tabletop?
 ○  .   
(2)  User  Key  Questions  
1.  How  familiar  are  you  with  simulation  games ?  (5-point  Likert  scale:  Not  familiar  at  all  
to
 
Extremely
 
familiar)
 
Like
 
e.g.
 
The
 
Sims
 
or
 
Train
 
Simulator,
 
Stardew
 
Valley,
 
SimCity,
 
Cities:
 
Skylines
 
 1  –  Not  at  all  familiar   2  –  Slightly  familiar   3  –  Somewhat  familiar   4  –  Moderately  familiar   5  –  Extremely  familiar  
Figure B5: Page 5 of Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline.
98
--- Page 99 ---
 
2.  How  much  do  you  already  know  about  how  the  energy  grid  works ?  (5-point  Likert  
scale:
 
Nothing
 
to
 
A
 
lot)
 
(e.g.
 
type
 
of
 
generators,
 
transmission
 
lines,
 
how
 
distribution
 
works,
 
…)
 
 1  –  Nothing  at  all   2  –  A  little   3  –  A  moderate  amount   4  –  A  lot   5  –  A  great  deal  
3.  Imagine  you’re  at  a  museum  with  multiple  exhibits  on  the  energy  grid.  What  would  
make
 
you
 
curious
 
enough
 
to
 
try
 
an
 
interactive
 
table
 
at
 
this
 
exhibition?
 
What
 
would
 
make
 
it
 
stand
 
out
 
and
 
invite
 
you
 
to
 
interact
 
with
 
it?
 ○  .  
4.  What  do  you  think  could  be  challenging  when  using  an  interactive  table  with  
physical
 
objects?
 ○  .  
5.  If  an  installation  allows  you  to  interact  with  tokens  or  these  physical  objects,  what  
would
 
make
 
it
 
clear
 
that
 
you
 
can
 
start
 
interacting
 
with
 
them?
 
 ○  . 
6.  Would  you  prefer  a  guided  experience,  where  you  and  others  experience  a  
start-to-finish
 
simulation,
 
or
 
a
 
drop-in/drop-out
 
experience
 
where
 
you
 
can
 
explore
 
freely
 
a
 
forever
 
ongoing
 
simulation?
 
 Guided   Drop-in/drop-out  
Why?  
●  .  
Summary  Interview  
 
1.  Alright,  to  summarise ,  you  mentioned:  ○  .  
2.  Is  there  anything  that  I  missed ?  ○  .  
Wrap-Up  Interview  
1.  Is  there  anything  we  did  not  talk  about  today  that  you  would  like  to  share  with  us?  ○  .  
Figure B6: Page 6 of Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline.
99
--- Page 100 ---
 
(3)  Co-Design  
Prepare:   Setup  materials   Move  chairs  out  of  the  way   Start  recording   Sync  mobile  recording  and  video  recording  (clap  twice  or  something)    In  this  activity,  we  want  you  to  show  us  how  you  would  interact  with  an  interactive  
table
 
using
 
physical
 
objects.
 
We  will  provide  materials  like  pens,  markers,  sticky  notes,  paper  cups,  and  pre-cut  
cardboard
 
pieces.
 
You
 
can
 
draw
 
on
 
them,
 
cut
 
them,
 
or
 
arrange
 
them
 
in
 
any
 
way
 
that
 
helps
 
express
 
your
 
ideas.
 
Please
 
use
 
at
 
least
 
20
 
tokens
 
at
 
the
 
same
 
time
 
to
 
show
 
how
 
multiple
 
objects
 
might
 
be
 
used
 
together.
 
Move
 
them,
 
group
 
them,
 
and
 
explain
 
what
 
you
 
expect
 
to
 
happen.
 
As  you  go,  please  think  out  loud.  Tell  us  what  your  objects  represent  and  describe  
what
 
you
 
are
 
doing
 
so
 
we
 
can
 
better
 
understand
 
your
 
thoughts.
 
The  Energy  Grid  Context  
Our  research  focuses  on  the  energy  grid,  which  delivers  electricity  from  power  
sources
 
to
 
buildings.
 
Power
 
comes
 
from
 
nuclear
 
plants,
 
coal
 
plants,
 
wind
 
turbines,
 
solar
 
panels,
 
and
 
hydroelectric
 
dams.
 
These
 
sources
 
send
 
energy
 
through
 
transmission
 
lines
 
to
 
where
 
it
 
is
 
needed.
 
The
 
grid
 
must
 
quickly
 
adapt
 
to
 
changes
 
in
 
demand
 
to
 
keep
 
everything
 
running
 
smoothly.
 
Your  Scenario  
Imagine  you  are  in  a  museum  and  see  an  exhibit  called  “The  Energy  Grid:  An  
Interactive
 
Game.”
 
A
 
large
 
interactive
 
table
 
is
 
in
 
front
 
of
 
you.
 
●  What  do  you  notice?  ●  What  makes  you  want  to  interact  with  it?  ●  What  do  you  expect  to  happen?  
Use  the  materials  to  show  us  what  you  would  like  to  do  and  how  you  think  the  table  
should
 
work.
 
There
 
are
 
no
 
right
 
or
 
wrong
 
answers—we
 
are
 
just
 
interested
 
in
 
your
 
ideas.
 
Let  us  know  if  you  have  any  questions  before  we  start!  
 
 
Figure B7: Page 7 of Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline.
100
--- Page 101 ---
 
Observations:  ●  .  
Question  Backlog  1.  What  does  this  token  represent?  2.  What  happens  when  you  move  it?  3.  Would  you  expect  a  reaction/any  feedback?  4.  What  feedback  should  the  table  give?  5.  What  would  make  this  interaction  more  intuitive?  6.  How  would  multiple  users  collaborate?  
Reflection  Okay,  time  is  up!   
1.  Now  reflecting  on  this  experience,  how  did  it  feel ?  ○  .  
2.  What  are  your  key  expectations  towards  the  interaction  and  why?  ○  .  
Summary  Co-Design  
1.  What  was,  according  to  you,  the  most  important  thing  that  you  wanted  to  show  us?  ○  .  
2.  Alright,  to  summarise ,  you  mentioned:  ○  .  
3.  Is  there  anything  that  I  missed ?  ○  .  
Wrap-Up  Co-Design  
1.  Is  there  anything  that  you  wish  you  could  have  shown  us  but  didn't  have  the  time  
for?
 ○  .  
2.  Do  you  have  any  remaining  questions  for  us?  ○  .  
Closing  
Then  we  are  finished  now,  and  we  will  stop  the  recording.  Thank  you  so  much  for   
participating!
 
This
 
really
 
helps
 
us
 
and
 
100%FAT
 
a
 
lot.
 
We
 
hope
 
you
 
have
 
a
 
great
 
day
 
🙂
 
 
Figure B8: Page 8 of Interview and Co-Design Session Guideline.
101
--- Page 102 ---
C Participant Information Sheet Interview and Co-
Designing
Participant Information Sheet 
25.02.2025 
Interviews with a Co-Design session regarding a Tangible Tabletop for 
100%FAT 
We would like to invite you to take part in a combined interview and co-design session for 
two Master’s Theses regarding a Tangible Tabletop for 100%FAT. Before you decide, you 
need to understand why the research is being done and what it would involve for you. Please 
take time to read the following information carefully. Ask questions if anything you read is 
not clear or if you would like more information. Take time to decide whether or not to take 
part.  
WHO WE ARE AND WHAT THIS STUDY IS ABOUT  
We are Sarah Sommerschuh and Stijn Teekens, both Master’s double degree students in 
Human Computer Interaction and Design. While we both study at University of Twente (NL), 
Sarah combined her double-degree with Aalto University (FI) and Stijn with KTH Royal 
Institute of Technology (SE). This research is part of our Master’s Theses which we write and 
conduct in collaboration with 100%FAT. For Sarah, the overall aim of the study is to explore 
and design the interaction of a large number of physical objects on a tangible tabletop in the 
use case of an energy grid system. For Stijn, the overall aim of the study is to evaluate the 
performance of a prototype developed specifically for this study, focuses on the 
improvement of tracking abilities such as its accuracy and the number of trackable objects, as 
well as the interactive experience it provides, and to compare this prototype to a similar 
product. For both Sarah and Stijn, the results will be used to write the thesis and to influence 
the outcome of a possible new tangible table for 100%FAT. 
WHAT WILL TAKING PART INVOLVE?  
Participation will involve a 45-60 minute interview and co-design session answering 
demographic questions, specific questions about your experience with e.g. interactive 
installations, (tangible tabletop) games and, if applicable, your area of expertise (e.g. 
knowledge of the energy grid and/or interaction design and/or creating energy games), as 
well as taking part in a co-design session that will include rough prototyping and 
bodystorming to express your vision of the interaction. Rough prototyping provides you with 
simple materials such as pens and paper, markers, post-it’s, and paper cups to mock-up your 
ideas, while bodystorming helps you immerse in a specific scenario in which the tabletop 
could be used. Bodystorming can be described as “a potential method of unlocking playful 
creativity, is a situated generative design method that utilizes full-body engagement with 
objects, space, and people to generate multiple design ideas”. This method will help you 
convey your intuitive interaction and intent with a tangible tabletop in an effective and 
insightful manner. Together with the rough prototyping, you can showcase physically and 
verbally your envisioned way of interacting with a tangible table. Participation will be taking 
part in person. The session will be audio- and video-recorded, while written notes will be 
taken as well. 
Figure C1: Page 1 of Participant Information Sheet.
102
--- Page 103 ---
WHY HAVE YOU BEEN INVITED TO TAKE PART?  
You have been invited to take part since you are either a possible future user of the tangible 
table, a stakeholder to the project, and/or an expert in a relevant field, making your insights 
and perspectives highly valuable to this project. 
DO YOU HAVE TO TAKE PART?  
The participation is completely voluntary. You have the right to refuse participation, refuse 
any question and withdraw at any time without any consequence whatsoever. 
WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE RISKS AND BENEFITS OF TAKING PART?  
As benefits, Sarah Sommerschuh’s and Stijn Teekens’ Master’s Theses will include better 
insights on how to design and build a tangible tabletop with multiple tokens in the context of 
an energy grid. Additionally, these insights can influence design decision on the possible later 
developed tabletop and its software. There are no known psychological risks associated with 
this session. While the session may involve the use of basic crafting tools such as scissors and 
staplers, participants will be advised to handle them with care to minimise any risk of minor 
physical injury. This research project has been reviewed by the Ethics Committee Information 
and Computer Science of the University of Twente. 
WILL TAKING PART BE CONFIDENTIAL?  
Participation in this study will be confidential. Any personal information that could identify 
you, such as your name, age, occupation, or audio/video recordings, will not be shared 
beyond the study team. For processing and publishing purposes, the data will be aggregated 
into broader categories, and all identifiers will be removed to ensure anonymity. 
HOW WILL INFORMATION YOU PROVIDE BE RECORDED, STORED 
AND PROTECTED?  
The data will be audio- and video-recorded, and transcripts may be created. Written notes 
may also be taken during the study. For the video-recordings, your hand movement and 
interaction with the materials will be captured and linked to your anonymous participant ID. 
This is needed to provide context for the researcher when reviewing the footage and notes at 
a later time. Having a video recording showing the actions performed will be vital to interpret 
the intent better. The camera will be positioned in such a way that it will only show your 
hands and possible your arms, and the actions you will perform. All data will be stored 
securely on the researcher’s laptop, such as on secure storage systems/tools (e.g., Miro), in 
accordance with data protection regulations. Data stored on such platforms will be password-
protected and accessible only to the study team. The audio and video recordings plus the 
written notes will be deleted after the studies conclude. The analysed and anonymised data 
will be included in the Master's theses, which will be publicly accessible via the official 
websites of the universities. You have the right to request access to, rectification of, or 
erasure of your personal data before the study concludes.  
WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THE RESULTS OF THE STUDY?  
The audio and video recordings, transcripts, and written notes will be used to gather insights 
and analyse interaction suggestions or other feedback regarding interacting with a tangible 
Figure C2: Page 2 of Participant Information Sheet.
103
--- Page 104 ---
tabletop. The anonymized findings will be presented in the Master’s theses, which will be 
published. Combined with further research, this may lead to concrete proposals aimed at (1) 
how to build and setup a possible tangible tabletop developed by 100%FAT, and (2) 
improving the interaction experience for such a table. 
 
WHO SHOULD YOU CONTACT FOR FURTHER INFORMATION?  
 
For any further information you can contact the researchers:  
Sarah Sommerschuh (s.sommerschuh@student.utwente.nl; +49 173 8172680) 
Stijn Teekens (s.teekens@student.utwente.nl; +31 619428238 
 
The research supervisors can be contacted via: 
Marko Nieminen (marko.nieminen@aalto.fi) 
Yann Seznec (yannse@kth.se) 
 
The critical observers can be contacted via 
Dr. A.M. Schaafstal (a.m.schaafstal@utwente.nl) 
Dr.ir. R.W. van Delden (r.w.vandelden@utwente.nl) 
 
If you have questions about your rights as a research participant, or wish to obtain 
information, ask questions, or discuss any concerns about this study with someone other than 
the researcher(s), please contact the Secretary of the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of 
Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science at the University of Twente 
through ethicscommittee-cis@utwente.nl  
 
THANK YOU 
Figure C3: Page 3 of Participant Information Sheet.
104
--- Page 105 ---
D Consent Form Interview and Co-Designing
Consent Form for Interviews with a Co-Design session regarding a 
Tangible Tabletop for 100%FAT 
You will receive a copy of this informed consent form 
 
Please tick the appropriate boxes  Yes  No  
Taking part in the study  
- I have read and understood the study information dated 25.02.2025, or it has 
been read to me. I have been able to ask questions about the study and my 
questions have been answered to my satisfaction.  
 
  
  
- I consent voluntarily to be a participant in this study and understand that I can 
refuse to answer questions and I can withdraw from the study at any time, 
without having to give a reason.  
 
  
  
- I understand that taking part in the study involves an audio- and video-recorded 
interview and co-design session, which involves bodystorming (using body 
movement to convey intent). Additionally, written notes will be taken. If needed, 
the recordings will be transcribed as text. All audio and video footage as well as 
written notes will be destroyed after completion of the master’s theses.  
 
Risks associated with participating in the study  
  
  
- I understand that by taking part in the study I will be using pen and paper 
materials to convey my intuitive and envisioned interaction with tangible objects 
on a tangible tabletop. All tasks will be limited to moving objects around on the table in 
specific ways. However, if I feel uncomfortable, I can stop my participation at any time. 
 
  
  
Use of the information in the study  
- I understand that the information I provide will be used for both Sarah 
Sommerschuh's and Stijn Teekens’ master's theses to gain insight into the 
interaction with a tangible tabletop. 
 
  
  
- I understand that personal information collected about me that can identify me, 
such as my name, age, occupation, or audio/video recordings, will not be shared 
beyond the study team. 
 
  
  
- I agree that my information can be quoted in research outputs. 
 
 
 
  
  
Signatures  
 
 
 
 
              _____________________ ______________  _____________________ 
Name of participant                    Signature                                         Date 
Figure D1: Page 1 of Consent Form.
105
--- Page 106 ---
 
 
I have accurately read out the information sheet to the potential participant and, to the best of 
my ability, ensured that the participant understands to what they are freely consenting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sarah Sommerschuh 
Researcher name                                        Signature                                       Date 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stijn Teekens 
Researcher name                                        Signature                                       Date  
 
 
 
 
Study contact details for further information:  
 
Researchers:  
Sarah Sommerschuh (s.sommerschuh@student.utwente.nl; +49 173 8172680) 
Stijn Teekens (s.teekens@student.utwente.nl; +31 619428238) 
 
Thesis Supervisors:  
Marko Nieminen (marko.nieminen@aalto.fi) 
Yann Seznec (yannse@kth.se) 
 
Critical Observers: 
Dr. A.M. Schaafstal (a.m.schaafstal@utwente.nl) 
Dr.ir. R.W. van Delden (r.w.vandelden@utwente.nl) 
 
If you have questions about your rights as a research participant, or wish to obtain 
information, ask questions, or discuss any concerns about this study with someone other than 
the researcher(s), please contact the Secretary of the Ethics Committee Information & 
Computer Science: ethicscommittee-CIS@utwente.nl 
Figure D2: Page 2 of Consent Form.
106
--- Page 107 ---
E Competitor Overview
Type Name Picture Goal Description
App Game Idle Energy 
Tycoon:Power Grid
Construct a robust power 
grid
You play on an island and want to 
efficiently distribute electricity to one 
headquarter and other buildings around. It 
is a click-and-idle game.
Computer Game Balancing the Grid
Balancing electricty 
supply and demand 
through the time of the 
shift
Play as an engineer who has to work 
during a shift in the Electricity National 
Control Centre. 
Computer Game Power Network Tycoon
Develop an island and 
plan and build the energy 
network
You are in control of the power system on 
an island that is growing bigger and need 
to manage electricity, deal with weather 
problems, and keep everything safe. The 
game is a mix of strategy and real-life 
energy challenges, which should make it 
feel realistic and fun to play.
Computer Game Power The Grid Connecting all buildings 
to power
An energy game where you can manage 
three coal electric production lines and 
build extra sun or wind stations. You need 
to manage demand and supply, with the 
supply always being higher than the 
demand.
Computer Game Power to the People
Build and upgrade the 
power grid to keep 
electricity flowing and 
customers happy
You play as power architect and have your 
first assignment in a small town that grows 
over time, which means their energy 
consumption changes. But you have to 
upgrade the power grid to keep the 
electricity flowing.
Computer Game 100%FAT Energy Game Keeping the city 
energised for 5 minutes
A city has grown and needs more energy. 
You need to build new energy providing 
facilities and invest in the city itself to 
improve the energy distribution and 
management. 
Figure E1: Competitor Overview.
107
--- Page 108 ---
F Storyboards
AStoryboard Concept:
Based on:
Figure F1: Page 1 of Storyboard Concept A.
T anja ent ers t he r oom and notices a table 
wit h a lot of object s placed ar ound it and 
some mo v ement on t he scr een. She f eels a 
bit o v er whelmed but st eps closer .
... and places it in t he cir cle on t he scr een.
Looking at t he scr een and seeing t he light s 
lighting up one object in fr ont of her , she 
understands t his object r epr esent s a solar 
panel and she has t o place it in t he cir cle.
On t he table, she sees t hat placing t he 
t ok en gained her +10 . F ollo wing t he line and 
arr o ws t o t he second scr een, she sees it 
means she got 10 coins.
She tak es t he object out of it s placeholder ...
R eading t he updat e on t he scr een she 
understands t hat fr om no w on, placing an 
object cost s her 10 coins and e v er y object 
will lose 10 coins e v er y no w and t hen.
Figure F2: Page 2 of Storyboard Concept A.
108
--- Page 109 ---
She looks do wn again.
She r eads t he ne xt updat e t elling her t hat 
t he t o wn has ener gy demands and want s t o 
gr o w .
An ener gy icon appears and mo v es fr om t he 
object along t he grid line t o war ds t he house 
r epr esenting a t o wn.
She get s t hat solar panels don't generat e 
ener gy at night and t hat she has t o swit ch 
t he supply object t o meet t he demand of 
t he t o wn.
T anja f ollo ws t he icon r eaching t he t o wn 
and looks up again t o r ead t he updat e 
t elling her t hat object s pr oduce ener gy t hat 
gains her 10 coins.
She put s t he solar panel back in it s 
placeholder ...
Figure F3: Page 3 of Storyboard Concept A.
... and places a coal fir ed po w er plant 
object. Immediat ely , she sees ener gy being 
pr oduced.
She sees t he grid wit h all it s a v ailable fields 
and understands t his is wher e she can 
place object s f or 10 coins. She looks up 
again.
She looks up and sees t he balance is 
r est or ed.
The timer star t s!
She looks do wn again.
She sees t he supply need bot h on t he 
second scr een and on t he table scr een, 
since t he t o wn is blinking. She grabs a solar 
panel again.
Figure F4: Page 4 of Storyboard Concept A.
109
--- Page 110 ---
She places it...
She wait s a bit t o r egain coins as t he ne xt 
night appr oaches.
... and sees t he supply bar w ent slight ly up, 
but it was not enough! The t o wn is still 
blinking and t he demand bar is higher t han 
t he supply bar .
A t night, she gains coins. Her solar panels 
ar e not generating ener gy , but so f ar she 
has still enough supply .
She quickly grabs f our ot her object s and 
places t hem.
Wit h t he new da y , t he t o wn has e xpanded 
and demands mor e ener gy!
Figure F5: Page 5 of Storyboard Concept A.
110
--- Page 111 ---
BStoryboard Concept:
Based on:
Figure F6: Page 1 of Storyboard Concept B.
T anja finds t he question and t he set -up 
intriguing. She lik es t he design and look of 
bot h t he object s and t he map and 
appr oaches t he table.
She grabs one of t he house object s...
She looks at t he t op right corner of t he table 
as no ot her ar ea is highlight ed or lit up.
...and places it on t he cir cle.
She t hen looks t o t he object s placed on t he 
lo w right corner and sees t hat t he houses 
on t op of t he object s mat ch t he house 
sho wn on t he scr een.
Par ticles sho w T anja t hat t his int eraction 
was corr ect
Figure F7: Page 2 of Storyboard Concept B.
111
--- Page 112 ---
On t he scr een, T anja sees t hat, so f ar , she 
has no house connect ed, she has 10 point s 
and a mission stating t o get electricity t o 
t he city "East End" .
A cir cle wit h a wind icon appears sho wing 
her t hat an object has t o be placed again.
Also, t he table sho ws t hat "East End" needs 
electricity b y marking t he city r ed. The lock 
of t he wind ener gy ar ea is blinking.
She walks t o t he left side of t he table...
T anja clicks on t he lock and unlocks it 
aut omatically b y pa ying wit h 10 of her 
point s.
... and grabs t he object wit h t he wind 
turbine out of it s placeholder .
Figure F8: Page 3 of Storyboard Concept B.
She places it on t he cir cle.
Once connect ed, arr o ws sho w ener gy is 
flo wing and a second house can be placed. 
Ho w e v er , at t he same time...
An animation sho ws she needs t o connect 
t he tw o lands t oget her b y dragging her 
finger .
... anot her city at t he f ar left ("Tin y T o wn") is 
unlock ed and sho ws a house as w ell. Also, 
t hr ee new ener gy ar eas can be unlock ed 
due t o t he gained point s.
She places her finger at t he land and 
connect s it wit h "East End" .
The second scr een sho ws she fulfilled her 
pr e vious mission and gained 20 point s. She 
has one house connect ed no w and a new 
mission of po w ering tw o cities fully .
Figure F9: Page 4 of Storyboard Concept B.
112
--- Page 113 ---
T anja is o v er whelmed what t o do ne xt. She 
decides t o place anot her house at "East 
End" .
Ev en t hough t her e ar e mor e arr o ws going t o 
"East End" no w , it is not enough. The city is 
still r ed.
"East End" is blinking r ed again, sho wing it 
needs mor e ener gy .
That is when a wind animation sho ws 
str onger winds in t he sout h of t he wind 
ener gy ar ea.
Since she cannot unlock anot her ener gy 
ar ea t hat is close b y , she places t he second 
wind turbine.
She drags bot h object s t o t he winds, which 
pr oduces e v en mor e arr o ws and brings 
"East End" back in t he gr een ar ea.
Figure F10: Page 5 of Storyboard Concept B.
113
--- Page 114 ---
CStoryboard Concept:
Based on:
Figure F11: Page 1 of Storyboard Concept C.
T anja is intrigued b y t he mission and lik es 
t he big 'star t' butt on.
She r eads on t he scr een t hat po w er sour ces 
should be placed in t he ar ea.
She pr esses it.
She grabs t he first object t o her left which is 
labelled as "Coal-fir ed po w er plant" .
The table sho ws her a vibrating cir cle wit hin 
t he ar ea and arr o ws pointing t o war ds t he 
second scr een. She looks up.
Aft er placing it, rings star t emitting and tw o 
houses light up. Also, arr o ws pointing t o t he 
scr een appear again.
Figure F12: Page 2 of Storyboard Concept C.
114
--- Page 115 ---
The scr een e xplains t he impor tance of a 
stable grid in t his game.
She sees t hat mor e people ar e ener gised 
but she is close t o not giving enough 
ener gy .
It also giv es an updat e on t he curr ent 
situation.
That is wh y t he f our ener gised houses star t 
blinking; sho wing t he y need mor e ener gy .
As T anja notices t hat t he fr equency goes 
do wn, she places one mor e wind turbine.
T anja tak es t oo long t o decide what t o do 
and tw o houses get off electricity again.
Figure F13: Page 3 of Storyboard Concept C.
Her grid is still not stable enough.
So she places t o w mor e coal-po w er ed 
plant s.
Randomly , she grabs tw o mor e wind 
turbines...
But wind has caught up again, t he wind 
turbines pr oduce mor e ener gy again, and 
t he grid becomes unstable!
... and places t hem. But she notices, t he y 
ar e not pr oducing much ener gy at t he 
moment compar ed t o t he coal-po w er ed 
suppliers, and mor e people need ener gy .
Which mak es people lea v e again.
Figure F14: Page 4 of Storyboard Concept C.
115
--- Page 116 ---
F rustrat ed, she r emo v es all wind turbines 
again and r eplaces t hem wit h tw o nuclear 
plant s.
As she hit s a milest one of 50 . 000 people, 
tw o mor e ar eas appear wher e she can place 
t ok ens at.
But wit hout r enewable ener gy suppliers, 
people lea v e again.
When t he fr equency is lo w , she adds t he 
wind turbines t o t he windy ar ea and mo v es 
t he solar parks t o t he sunn y ar ea.
She r eplaces one nuclear plant wit h tw o 
solar parks and it is going w ell again.
Wit h off -peak star ting...
Figure F15: Page 5 of Storyboard Concept C.
116
--- Page 117 ---
G Storyboards Requirements Fulfilment
Figure G1: Scoring 1.
117
--- Page 118 ---
Figure G2: Scoring 2.
118
--- Page 119 ---
H Low-Fi Prototyping: Sketches
1
2
Figure H1: Page 1 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
119
--- Page 120 ---
3
4
Figure H2: Page 2 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
120
--- Page 121 ---
5
6
Figure H3: Page 3 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
121
--- Page 122 ---
7
8
Figure H4: Page 4 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
122
--- Page 123 ---
9
10
Figure H5: Page 5 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
123
--- Page 124 ---
11
12
Figure H6: Page 6 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
124
--- Page 125 ---
13
14
Figure H7: Page 7 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
125
--- Page 126 ---
15
16
Figure H8: Page 8 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
126
--- Page 127 ---
17
18
Figure H9: Page 9 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
127
--- Page 128 ---
19
20
Figure H10: Page 10 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
128
--- Page 129 ---
21
22
Figure H11: Page 11 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
129
--- Page 130 ---
23
24
Figure H12: Page 12 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
130
--- Page 131 ---
25
26
Figure H13: Page 13 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
131
--- Page 132 ---
27
28
Figure H14: Page 14 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
132
--- Page 133 ---
29
30
Figure H15: Page 15 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
133
--- Page 134 ---
31
32
Figure H16: Page 16 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
134
--- Page 135 ---
33
34
Figure H17: Page 17 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
135
--- Page 136 ---
35
36
Figure H18: Page 18 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
136
--- Page 137 ---
37
38
Figure H19: Page 19 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
137
--- Page 138 ---
39
40
Figure H20: Page 20 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
138
--- Page 139 ---
41
42
Figure H21: Page 21 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
139
--- Page 140 ---
43
44
Figure H22: Page 22 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
140
--- Page 141 ---
45
46
Figure H23: Page 23 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
141
--- Page 142 ---
47
48
Figure H24: Page 24 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
142
--- Page 143 ---
49
50
Figure H25: Page 25 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
143
--- Page 144 ---
51
52
Figure H26: Page 26 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
144
--- Page 145 ---
53
54
Figure H27: Page 27 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
145
--- Page 146 ---
55
56
Figure H28: Page 28 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
146
--- Page 147 ---
57
58
Figure H29: Page 29 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
147
--- Page 148 ---
59
60
Figure H30: Page 30 of Low-Fi Prototyping Sketches.
148
--- Page 149 ---
I High-Fi Prototyping: Colour Coding
Figure I1: Colour Coding.
149
--- Page 150 ---
J High-Fi Prototyping: 3D Printed Models
Figure J1: 3D Printed Tokens and Placeholders.
150
--- Page 151 ---
K High-Fi Prototyping: Full Interaction
1
Star t
2
Placing first house t ok en
3
Simulation star ting
Figure K1: Page 1 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
151
--- Page 152 ---
4
Super City Alarm: Not enough ener gy
5
T apping lock of wind ener gy ar ea
6
Wind ener gy ar ea unlock ed
Figure K2: Page 2 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
152
--- Page 153 ---
7
Hint t o dr ag a po w er connection line
8
Dr agging po w er connection line
9
Placing first wind mill t ok en
Figure K3: Page 3 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
153
--- Page 154 ---
10
Mission 1 complet ed
11
Gaining coins fr om mission 1
12
Gr abbing second house t ok en
Figure K4: Page 4 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
154
--- Page 155 ---
13
Placing second house t ok en
14
Gr abbing second wind mill t ok en
15
Placing second wind mill t ok en
Figure K5: Page 5 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
155
--- Page 156 ---
16
Wind mo v ed do wnwar ds
17
Dr agging wind t ok ens t o war ds wind
18
Wind ener gy r est or ed
Figure K6: Page 6 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
156
--- Page 157 ---
19
Gaining coins fr om mission 2
20
Placing t hir d house t ok en
21
Placing f our t h house t ok en
Figure K7: Page 7 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
157
--- Page 158 ---
22
T apping lock of solar ar ea
23
Solar ar ea unlock ed
2 4
Gr abbing solar panel t ok ens
Figure K8: Page 8 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
158
--- Page 159 ---
25
Placing first solar panel t ok en
26
Placing second solar panel t ok en
27
Hint t o connect solar ar ea wit h Super City
Figure K9: Page 9 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
159
--- Page 160 ---
28
Connecting solar ar ea wit h Super City
29
T apping lock of coal ar ea
30
Coal ar ea unlock ed
Figure K10: Page 10 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
160
--- Page 161 ---
31
Placing first coal-fir ed po w er plant t ok en
32
Placing second coal-fir ed po w er plant t ok en
33
Connecting coal ar ea wit h Super City
Figure K11: Page 11 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
161
--- Page 162 ---
34
Supplied f our houses in Super City
35
Gaining coins fr om mission 3
36
Placing t he fift h house t ok en in Super City
Figure K12: Page 12 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
162
--- Page 163 ---
37
Placing t he first house t ok en in Tin y City
38
Placing t he second house t ok en in Tin y City
39
Connecting solar ar ea wit h Tin y City
Figure K13: Page 13 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
163
--- Page 164 ---
40
T apping lock of wat er ar ea
4 1
Unlock ed wat er ar ea
42
Gr abbing h y dr oelectric po w er plant t ok en
Figure K14: Page 14 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
164
--- Page 165 ---
43
Placing h y dr oelectric po w er plant
44
Connecting wat er ar ea wit h Tin y City
45
Mission 4 complet ed
Figure K15: Page 15 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
165
--- Page 166 ---
46
Super City Alarm: No mor e wind lead t o not enough ener gy
47
T apping lock of nuclear ar ea
48
Unlock ed nuclear ar ea
Figure K16: Page 16 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
166
--- Page 167 ---
49
Gr abbing nuclear po w er plant t ok ens
50
Placing first nuclear po w er plant t ok en
51
Placing second nuclear po w er plant t ok en
Figure K17: Page 17 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
167
--- Page 168 ---
52
Connecting nuclear ar e wit h Super City
53
Ener gy of Super City r est or ed
54
Placing house t ok en in Lonely City
Figure K18: Page 18 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
168
--- Page 169 ---
55
Connecting nuclear wit h Lonely City
56
Mission 5 complet ed
57
Super City and Lonely City sad: W ant a balance of f ossil and r ene wable
Figure K19: Page 19 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
169
--- Page 170 ---
58
Mo ving wind t ok ens up t o war ds wind
59
Super City happ y
60
Connecting wind ar ea wit h Lonely City
Figure K20: Page 20 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
170
--- Page 171 ---
61
Mission 6 complet ed
62
Placing first house t ok en in East City
63
Placing second house t ok en in East City
Figure K21: Page 21 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
171
--- Page 172 ---
64
T r ying t o connect nuclear ar ea wit h East City
65
Connecting wind ar ea wit h East City
66
Connecting coal ar ea wit h East City
Figure K22: Page 22 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
172
--- Page 173 ---
67
Da y turned t o night: No mor e solar ener gy
68
T apping lock of gas ar ea
69
Unlock ed gas ar ea
Figure K23: Page 23 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
173
--- Page 174 ---
7 0
Gr abbing gas-fir ed po w er plant
71
Placing gas-fir ed po w er plant
72
Connecting gas ar ea wit h Tin y City
Figure K24: Page 24 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
174
--- Page 175 ---
7 3
Mission 7 complet ed: End of game
7 4
Placing all t ok ens back
7 5
Simulation r est or ed aft er placing last t ok en back
Figure K25: Page 25 of Full Interaction with High-Fi Prototype.
175
--- Page 176 ---
L Participant Information Sheet Usability Study
Figure L1: Page 1 of Participant Information Sheet.
176
--- Page 177 ---
Figure L2: Page 2 of Participant Information Sheet.
177
--- Page 178 ---
Figure L3: Page 3 of Participant Information Sheet.
178
--- Page 179 ---
M Consent Form Usability Study
Figure M1: Page 1 of Consent Form.
179
--- Page 180 ---
Figure M2: Page 2 of Consent Form.
180
--- Page 181 ---
N System Usability Scale
P ar ticipant ID:
Sy st em Usability Scal e (SU S)
Str ongl y 
Disagr ee
Str ongl y 
A gr ee
I think that I w oul d lik e t o use this 
sy st em fr equentl y 1 2 3 4 5
I f ound the sy st em unnecessaril y 
compl e x 1 2 3 4 5
I thou ght the sy st em w as easy t o 
use 1 2 3 4 5
I think that I w oul d need the 
suppor t o f a t echnical person t o 
be abl e t o use this sy st em
1 2 3 4 5
I f ound the v arious functions in 
this sy st em w er e w ell int e gr at ed 1 2 3 4 5
I thou ght ther e w as t oo much 
inconsist enc y in this sy st em 1 2 3 4 5
I w oul d imagine that most peopl e 
w oul d l earn t o use this sy st em 
v ery quick l y
1 2 3 4 5
I f ound the sy st em v ery 
cumbersome t o use 1 2 3 4 5
I f el t v ery confident using the 
sy st em 1 2 3 4 5
 I needed t o l earn a l ot o f thing s 
bef or e I coul d get going with this 
sy st em
1 2 3 4 5
Figure N1: System Usability Scale.
181
--- Page 182 ---
O User Engagement Scale - Short Form
P ar ticipant ID:
User Engagement Scal e (UES-SF)
Shor t F orm
Str ongl y 
Disagr ee Disagr ee
Neither 
A gr ee nor 
Disagr ee A gr ee
Str ongl y 
A gr ee
My e xperience w as r e w ar ding.
1 2 3 4 5
Using this inst all ation w as t axing.
1 2 3 4 5
I f el t frustr at ed whil e using this 
inst all ation. 1 2 3 4 5
The time I spent using the 
inst all ation just slipped a w a y . 1 2 3 4 5
This inst all ation w as aestheticall y 
appealing. 1 2 3 4 5
The inst all ation appeal ed t o the 
visual senses. 1 2 3 4 5
I f el t int er est ed in this e xperience.
1 2 3 4 5
I l ost m y self in this e xperience.
1 2 3 4 5
This inst all ation w as attr activ e.
1 2 3 4 5
 I f ound this inst all ation confusing 
t o use. 1 2 3 4 5
I w as a b sor b ed in this e xperience.
1 2 3 4 5
Using this inst all ation w as 
w or thwhil e. 1 2 3 4 5
Figure O1: Example UES-SF of Participant 1.
182
--- Page 183 ---
P Guideline Usability Study
 
Usability  Study  Guideline  
Setup  Prepare  the  workspace   test  the  video  camera   check  if  there  is  enough  record  time  left  on  camera!   prepare  consent  form  and  informational  brochure   load  protopie  on  screen  first,  then  table  and  hide  mouse   test  keyboard  with  wizard   Participant  ID: PX  Start  at:  __:__  End  at:  __:__   Hi  and  welcome  to  today's  evaluation  session,  or  also  so-called  usability  study!  Before  I  
officially
 
start,
 
is
 
it
 
okay
 
for
 
you
 
if
 
I
 
record
 
this
 
session
 
with
 
both
 
audio
 
and
 
video?
 
This
 
will
 
help
 
me
 
in
 
analysing
 
and
 
rewatching
 
parts
 
in
 
case
 
I
 
miss
 
important
 
elements
 
of
 
the
 
session.
 
(If
 
yes)
 
Perfect,
 
I
 
will
 
start
 
the
 
recording
 
now
 
and
 
please
 
don't
 
be
 
confused,
 
I
 
will
 
ask
 
you
 
immediately
 
again
 
if
 
it
 
is
 
fine
 
for
 
you
 
to
 
get
 
recorded,
 
so
 
I
 
also
 
have
 
your
 
confirmation
 
on
 
the
 
recording:
 
 Recording  started  
Okay,  so  welcome  again  to  this  session,  are  you  okay  with  being  recorded?  
 Recording  confirmed  
Alright,  so  as  a  background  to  today’s  session:  Stijn,  who  is  another  student,  and  I  both  
study
 
Human-Computer
 
Interaction
 
and
 
Design
 
and
 
are
 
Master’s
 
Thesis
 
students
 
for
 
100%FAT,
 
which
 
is
 
an
 
art
 
and
 
technology
 
company
 
here
 
in
 
Enschede.
 
For
 
our
 
graduation
 
assignment
 
we
 
both
 
got
 
the
 
same
 
project
 
to
 
work
 
on
 
but
 
with
 
different
 
focuses.
 
While
 
Stijn
 
focuses
 
on
 
the
 
technological
 
part
 
of
 
the
 
project,
 
I
 
target
 
the
 
interaction
 
and
 
design
 
part.
 
The  project  we  work  on  has  to  do  with  a  tangible  tabletop  game  related  to  the  energy  grid,  
but
 
for
 
now
 
I
 
will
 
not
 
further
 
explain
 
this
 
as
 
you
 
will
 
get
 
to
 
see
 
and
 
test
 
it
 
yourself
 
later.
 
However,  this  usability  study  will  help  me  understand  how  usable,  engaging,  and  educational  
the
 
current
 
prototype
 
of
 
this
 
tangible
 
tabletop
 
is
 
and
 
what
 
needs
 
to
 
be
 
changed
 
to
 
enhance
 
the
 
experience.
 
Please  now  take  your  time  to  read  the  participant  information  sheet  and  sign  the  consent  
form.
 
Also,
 
please
 
ask
 
any
 
questions
 
that
 
might
 
come
 
up.
 
 Consent  form  signed  
 
Figure P1: Page 1 of Guideline Usability Study.
183
--- Page 184 ---
 
Q:  Do  you  have  any  questions  before  we  start?  
●  .  
The  procedure  will  be  as  follows:  I  will  first  ask  you  a  few  simple  demographic  questions  
about
 
you
 
as
 
a
 
person
 
and
 
then
 
a
 
few
 
more
 
specifically
 
tailored
 
to
 
the
 
topic.
 
Then
 
you
 
will
 
interact
 
with
 
the
 
prototype
 
and
 
finally
 
you
 
will
 
fill
 
out
 
two
 
short
 
questionnaires
 
and
 
I
 
will
 
ask
 
you
 
a
 
few
 
final
 
questions.
 
One  more  remark:  There  are  no  right  or  wrong  answers  or  interactions,  every  feedback  is  
valuable
 
and
 
only
 
with
 
honest
 
feedback
 
can
 
I
 
and
 
100%FAT
 
learn
 
and
 
get
 
better.
 
So
 
please
 
answer
 
any
 
questions
 
honestly
 
and
 
interact
 
as
 
you
 
really
 
would,
 
and
 
if
 
you
 
do
 
not
 
have
 
an
 
opinion,
 
cannot
 
answer
 
a
 
question
 
I
 
ask,
 
or
 
don’t
 
know
 
how
 
to
 
continue
 
the
 
interaction,
 
please
 
feel
 
free
 
to
 
say
 
so.
 
Also,
 
if
 
there
 
are
 
any
 
questions
 
you
 
would
 
not
 
like
 
to
 
answer,
 
just
 
let
 
me
 
know.
 
We
 
will
 
then
 
skip
 
it
 
and
 
continue
 
with
 
the
 
next
 
one.
 
Demographic  Questions  (Ice  breaker)  
Let’s  get  started  with  some  easy  questions  about  you  as  a  person:  
Q:  Where  are  you  from?  
●  .  
Q:  How  old  are  you?  
 18  -  24   25  -  34   35  -  44   45  -  54   55  -  65   65+  
Q:  What  gender  do  you  identify  with?  
 Woman   Man   Diverse   Other   Prefer  not  to  say  
Q:  What  is  your  current  occupation?  
●  .  
 
Figure P2: Page 2 of Guideline Usability Study.
184
--- Page 185 ---
 
Key  
(1)  Pre-Educational  Questions  
The  following  questions  are  now  for  me  to  understand  your  current  knowledge  about  the  
energy
 
grid,
 
and
 
don’t
 
worry,
 
there
 
is
 
nothing
 
bad
 
nor
 
good
 
in
 
answering
 
these
 
questions
 
correctly
 
or
 
incorrectly.
 
They
 
just
 
help
 
me
 
in
 
evaluating
 
the
 
game’s
 
educational
 
value
 
and
 
please
 
feel
 
free
 
to
 
answer
 
every
 
question
 
to
 
the
 
best
 
of
 
your
 
abilities.
 
1.  How  would  you  describe  your  understanding  of  the  phrase  ‘electricity  mix’  or  
‘power-generation
 
mix?
 ○  .  
2.  Can  you  please  list  all  the  energy  sources  you  think  a  city  can  use  to  generate  
electricity?
 ○  .  
3.  Why  do  you  think  a  city  might  use  more  than  one  energy  source  instead  of  just  
one?
 ○  .  
4.  How  interested  are  you  in  learning  more  about  how  the  energy  system  works?  ○  .  
(2)  Interaction  and  Tasks  
Thanks,  that  was  already  it  for  the  pre-questions.  
Before  we  go  to  the  installation,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  it  is  a  prototype,  so  no  finished  
game,
 
which
 
means
 
not
 
every
 
interaction
 
will
 
work.
 
Therefore,
 
what
 
I
 
would
 
like
 
you
 
to
 
do
 
throughout
 
the
 
whole
 
interaction
 
is
 
to
 
think
 
aloud,
 
so
 
to
 
share
 
your
 
thoughts
 
about
 
what
 
you
 
see
 
or
 
you
 
notice
 
or
 
you
 
want
 
to
 
interact
 
with;
 
as
 
in:
 
“Oh
 
wow
 
there
 
is
 
a
 
blue
 
button
 
now
 
popping
 
up,
 
this
 
is
 
inviting
 
me
 
to
 
press
 
it
 
so
 
I
 
want
 
to
 
press
 
it
 
now”.
 
 
At  that  point  I  then  might  have  to  interrupt  you  in  case  that  interaction  does  not  work  for  
example
 
or
 
I
 
need
 
to
 
direct
 
you
 
into
 
a
 
specific
 
order
 
of
 
interaction
 
due
 
to
 
the
 
prototype’s
 
limitations.
 
So
 
sometimes,
 
I
 
might
 
also
 
give
 
you
 
little
 
tasks
 
or
 
hints
 
on
 
what
 
to
 
do
 
next.
 
—  WALK  TO  INSTALLATION  —  
I'm  going  to  go  inside  now  and  finish  preparing,  and  then  I'll  come  and  let  you  in.  
When  I  let  you  in,  I  would  like  you  to  imagine  that  you  are  in  a  local  museum  in  Enschede  
with
 
an
 
exhibition
 
about
 
the
 
energy
 
grid.
 
As
 
soon
 
as
 
I
 
open
 
the
 
door,
 
please
 
share
 
your
 
thoughts
 
on
 
what
 
you
 
can
 
see
 
and
 
start
 
doing
 
whatever
 
you
 
would
 
like
 
to
 
do
 
with
 
it.
 
 
Figure P3: Page 3 of Guideline Usability Study.
185
--- Page 186 ---
 
Tasks/Questions  1.  Try  to  interact  with  the  installation  for  now  until  I  give  you  the  next  directional  
hint
 2.  Place  both  solar  first  before  placing  coal  3.  First  build  house  in  super  city  4.  You  first  want  to  restore  Super  City’s  supply  and  then  continue  with  Lonely  Hill  5.  First  build  houses  in  east  end  and  then  connect  
Notes  ●  .  
(3)  Questionnaires  
Perfect,  thank  you,  that  was  the  interaction!  Please  now  sit  here  and  next  are  two  very  short  
check-box
 
questionnaires
 
that
 
I
 
would
 
like
 
you
 
to
 
fill
 
out.
   SUS   UES-Short  form   Please  answer  on  your  own  and  let  me  know  when  you  are  done.  
(4)  Post-Educational  Questions  
1.  How  would  you  describe  your  understanding  of  the  phrase  ‘electricity  mix’  or  
‘power-generation
 
mix?
 ○  .  
2.  Can  you  please  list  all  the  energy  sources  you  think  a  city  can  use  to  make  
electricity?
 ○  .  
3.  Why  might  a  city  use  more  than  one  of  those  sources  instead  of  just  one?  ○  .  
4.  How  interested  are  you  in  learning  more  about  how  the  energy  system  works?  ○  .  
5.  Post-Usability/Engagement/Overall  Questions  
Perfect,  thank  you.  Now  I  would  like  to  ask  a  bit  better  about  how  you  experienced  the  
prototype.
 
1.  What  is  your  overall  impression  of  the  installation?  (What  stood  out  most?)  ○  .  
2.  Would  you  recommend  this  installation  to  your  family  and  friends?  Why?  
Figure P4: Page 4 of Guideline Usability Study.
186
--- Page 187 ---
 
○  .  
3.  How  did  you  find  working  with  the  physical  tokens  on  the  table,  which  are  the  
objects
 
you
 
placed
 
on
 
the
 
table
 
(such
 
as
 
the
 
houses
 
or
 
wind
 
turbines)?
 (What  did  you  
think
 
about
 
the
 
amount?) ○  .  
4.  Thinking  back  to  the  moment  you  first  saw  the  table,  screen  and  tokens,  what  did  
you
 
think
 
you
 
were
 
supposed
 
to
 
do
?
 ○  .  
5.  Can  you  walk  me  through  a  moment  that  felt  smooth  or  satisfying ?  ○  .  
6.  And  now  a  moment  when  you  felt  stuck  or  unsure ?  ○  .  
7.  If  you  could  change  one  thing  to  make  the  experience  easier  or  more  enjoyable,  
what
 
would
 
it
 
be?
 ○  .  
Summary  
8.  Alright,  to  summarise ,  you  mentioned:  ○  .  
9.  Is  there  anything  that  I  missed ?  ○  .  
Wrap-Up  
1.  Is  there  anything  else  that  you  would  wish  to  say  or  add ?  ○  .  
2.  Do  you  have  any  remaining  questions  for  me?  ○   
Closing  
Then  we  are  finished  now,  and  we  will  stop  the  recording.  Thank  you  so  much  for   
participating!
 
This
 
really
 
helps
 
me
 
and
 
100%FAT
 
a
 
lot.
 
I
 
hope
 
you
 
have
 
a
 
great
 
day
 
🙂
 
  End  and  upload  recording   Video   Audio   Scan  consent  form  
Figure P5: Page 5 of Guideline Usability Study.
187
--- Page 188 ---
Q Questionnaire Results
Figure Q1: SUS Scores.
Figure Q2: UES-SF Scores.
188
--- Page 189 ---
R 1D Data: Elbow Heights
Figure R1: Percentiles of Elbow Heights of Dutch Adults retrieved from DINED
(n.d.).
189